

===== PAGE 1 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

The Eﬀects of Teacher Quality
on Adult Criminal Justice Contact
Evan K. Rose, Jonathan Schellenberg, and Yotam Shem-Tov ∗
September 2025
Abstract
This paper develops new approaches for estimating multi-dimensional teacher
eﬀects and uses them to understand teachers’ impacts on their students’ future
criminal justice contact (CJC). Using a unique data set linking the universe of
North Carolina public school data to administrative arrest records, we ﬁnd a
standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on students’ future arrests of 2.7 percent-
age points (11% of the sample mean). Teachers’ eﬀects on CJC are orthogonal
to their eﬀects on academic achievement, implying assignment to a high test
score value-added teacher does not reduce future CJC. However, teachers who
reduce suspensions and improve attendance substantially reduce future arrests.
Similar patterns emerge when allowing teacher impacts to vary by student sex,
race, and socio-economic status. The results suggest that the development of
non-cognitive skills is central to the returns to education for crime and highlight
an important dimension of teachers’ social value not targeted by test score-based
quality metrics.
∗Rose: Associate Professor, University of Chicago and NBER; ekrose@uchicago.edu. Schellen-
berg: Economist at Amazon Web Services; jschellenberg@econ.berkeley.edu. Shem-Tov: Assistant
Professor, University of California, Los Angeles and NBER; shemtov@econ.ucla.edu. We are ex-
tremely grateful to Christopher Walters, David Card, Jesse Rothstein, and Patrick Kline, who pro-
vided invaluable support and advice. We thank the North Carolina Education Research Data Center
for assistance in the construction of our data set and to Justin McCrary and the Spencer Foundation,
who helped fund this project. Thanks also go to Natalie Bau, Gordon Dahl, Zarek Brot-Goldberg,
Amanda Dahlstrand, Alessandra Fenizia, Kevin Todd, Nicholas Y. Li, Conrad Miller, Hilary Hoynes,
Jonathan Holmes, Juliana Londo˜ no-V´ elez, Jennifer Kwok, Julien LaFortune, John Loeser, Justin Mc-
Crary, Enrico Moretti, Derek Neal, Nestor Le Nestour, Elena Pastorino, Avner Shlain, and Isaac
Sorkin for their helpful comments and suggestions. A previous version of this paper was entitled
“The Eﬀects of Teacher Quality on Criminal Behavior.” Software to implement the methods in this
paper is available at https://pypi.org/project/ustat-var/.

===== PAGE 2 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

The social costs of crime and any resulting arrest and incarceration are large. Cohen
and Piquero (2009), for example, estimate the value of averting a high-risk youth from
future crime at $3.8 to $5.3 million. One way to reduce these costs is through the
education system. Little is known, however, about how teachers aﬀect crime, despite
their central role in providing education. Even less is known about which skills good
teachers foster to reduce their students’ future crime, and how those skills diﬀer from
those most important for other outcomes (Chetty et al., 2014b; Jackson, 2018; Jackson
et al., 2020; Petek and Pope, 2021; Gilraine and Pope, 2021). Since diﬀerent students
may beneﬁt from focusing on diﬀerent skills and approaches, an important related
question is whether some teachers are better at reaching particular types of students
(Dee, 2005; Gershenson et al., 2022).
Studying these questions requires estimating and relating teachers’ impacts on mul-
tiple outcomes and types of students, which can be diﬃcult with noisy estimates of
each teacher’s eﬀects. The standard approach is to estimate teachers’ value-added
on each outcome or student type separately while adjusting for sampling error using
Empirical Bayes (EB) techniques. 1 Recent work has highlighted potential violations
of the parametric assumptions embedded in standard EB approaches (Gilraine et al.,
2021; Chen, 2023). Even if the model is correctly speciﬁed, however, the distribution
of EB estimates does not consistently estimate the distribution of teacher eﬀects. The
variance of shrunken value-added estimates can approach zero, for example, even if
teachers’ true impacts vary widely, and covariances across groups or outcomes can
diﬀer in sign and magnitude from the covariances of true eﬀects.
To help overcome these issues, this paper develops new, EB-free approaches for study-
ing multi-dimensional teacher eﬀects. We then apply these tools to nearly two decades
of linked administrative schooling and criminal justice records. We estimate the vari-
ance of elementary and middle school teachers’ eﬀects on their students’ future crime
as measured by rates of criminal justice contact (CJC) including arrest, conviction,
and incarceration. To study the drivers of these eﬀects, we estimate their covariance
with teachers’ eﬀects on standardized test scores, behavioral proxies for non-cognitive
skills, and study skills. Doing so allows us to ask whether teachers who boost test
scores, for example, also decrease their students’ future crime. After establishing a
1Studies using this approach include Jackson (2018) and Petek and Pope (2021) for impacts on
test scores and behaviors, and Bates et al. (2022) and Biasi et al. (2021) for impacts on disadvantaged
and non-disadvantaged students, among others.
1

===== PAGE 3 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

set of baseline, homogeneous eﬀects, we explore the importance of accounting for
heterogeneity across student characteristics.
The analysis is made possible by a novel merge of administrative criminal justice and
education records from North Carolina. The combined data set includes almost two
million students and 40,000 teachers. The education records cover all students in
public schools in grades 3 to 12 from 1996 to 2013 and include rich data on students
and their outcomes. The criminal justice data include the universe of arrests and de-
tailed data on case outcomes, including conviction status and sentences. The data are
linked by name and date of birth; comparisons of match rates to external benchmarks
suggest the merge quality is high.
Our empirical strategy uses non-parametric estimators of the variance-covariance
structure of teacher eﬀects, building on the literature on variance component esti-
mation (e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988; Aaronson et al., 2007; Kline et al., 2020).
The approach separates the problem of estimating the joint distribution of teacher
eﬀects—the goal of our analysis—from obtaining good estimates of a set of individual
teacher’s eﬀects—the goal of EB and other forecasting techniques. Many parameters
sought in the value-added literature, such as the implied impacts of a one standard
deviation increase in teacher quality, can be easily recovered using our approach. As
is common practice, the analysis relies on a rich set of characteristics available as
controls to justify a conditional independence assumption, which is supported by a
battery of validation tests.
We ﬁnd large teacher eﬀects on both short and long-run outcomes. The estimated
standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on future arrests, for example, is 2.7 percentage
points (p.p.), or 11.3% of the sample mean, and is 2.1 p.p. (23.6%) for incarceration.
The pattern of eﬀects across crime types and severity suggest that reductions stem
from decreases in criminal behavior as opposed to better evasion of police. We ﬁnd
similarly large eﬀects on long-run academic outcomes studied in previous analyses,
such as high school graduation and students’ plans to attend college. Estimated
impacts on short-run outcomes are similar to recent estimates in other geographies
(Kane and Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al., 2014a).
Relating eﬀects on short- and long-run outcomes reveals that teachers who boost
test scores do not meaningfully decrease students’ future CJC. Shifting a student to
2

===== PAGE 4 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

a teacher with a one standard deviation higher eﬀect on test scores decreases their
likelihood of arrest between the ages of 16 and 21 by less than 0.001 p.p.; we cannot
reject zero eﬀect at conventional signiﬁcance levels. Teachers who boost study skills
have similarly limited eﬀects on CJC. High test score eﬀect teachers do, however,
improve students’ long-run academic outcomes, with estimated impacts on college
attendance similar to those in Chetty et al. (2014b).
By contrast, teachers’ impacts on behavioral outcomes are closely connected to their
impacts on CJC. Assignment to a teacher with a standard deviation more beneﬁcial
impact on a summary index of discipline, attendance, and grade repetition decreases
the likelihood of future CJC by 2-4%, depending on the outcome. If teacher eﬀects on
short-run behaviors are evidence of inﬂuence over non-cognitive and socio-emotional
skills and traits such as conscientiousness, perseverance, and sociability (Lleras, 2008;
Bertrand and Pan, 2013), our results support a growing body of research suggesting
that the accumulation of “soft skills” may lie at the heart of the return to education
for crime (Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001; Heckman et al., 2006; Reynolds et al.,
2010; Heckman and Kautz, 2012; Heckman et al., 2013; Jackson et al., 2020). 2
While the estimates rely on non-experimental teacher assignments, multiple tests
demonstrate that all eﬀects are measured with limited bias. The estimates are insen-
sitive to the inclusion of covariates unlikely to be used by administrators assigning
teachers to students, including parental education, twin indicators, and twice-lagged
test scores, all of which strongly predict outcomes conditional on the baseline controls.
Using teacher switches across schools and school-grades to instrument for teacher as-
signments, we cannot reject that estimates are unbiased. Nevertheless, we also show
that our estimates provide a lower bound on the variance of causal eﬀects and that
covariances in causal eﬀects are still identiﬁed under certain forms of bias, including
if estimates of test score eﬀects are unbiased but direct eﬀects on CJC are not.
Teachers have substantive impacts on future CJC for many types of students, in-
cluding groups deﬁned by sex, race, socio-economic status, and predicted CJC risk
using all covariates. But eﬀects are not perfectly correlated across student types.
The correlation of a teacher’s eﬀects on their white and non-white students’ criminal
2A large literature documents the importance of non-cognitive and socio-emotional skills for long-
run outcomes, including Heckman and Rubinstein (2001), Cunha and Heckman (2008), Cunha et al.
(2010), Lindqvist and Vestman (2011), Deming (2017), and Gray-Lobe et al. (2023).
3

===== PAGE 5 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

arrests is roughly 0.5, for example, indicating important heterogeneity in teachers’
impacts. Eﬀects on short-run outcomes, on the other hand, show tight correlation
across groups. The correlation between a teacher’s test score eﬀects for boys and
girls is 0.96, for example. The impact of assignment to a teacher good at boosting
test scores or improving behaviors for observably similar students is thus similar to
the average eﬀect, since heterogeneous eﬀects on short-run outcomes provide a poor
proxy for heterogeneous eﬀects on long-run outcomes.
To conclude, we simulate the impacts of replacing the bottom 5% of teachers based
on various measures. Retention policies based on teachers’ direct eﬀects on long-run
outcomes would result in large improvements, including up to 10 p.p. increases in
college attendance and 6 p.p. reductions in criminal arrests for exposed students.
Policies that target teachers using their impacts on short-run measures, however,
achieve a fraction of these gains, underscoring the scope of teacher impacts not cap-
tured by these measures. Putting emphasis on diﬀerent short-run outcomes trades
oﬀ eﬀects on long-run academic and CJC outcomes, with policies that emphasize test
score impacts most strongly aﬀecting academic outcomes and policies that emphasize
behaviors primarily inﬂuencing criminal justice outcomes.
This paper contributes to a broad literature on the importance of teachers. Related
work has shown that teacher quality—as measured by their inﬂuence on students’
test scores—varies widely (Rivkin et al., 2005; Kane and Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al.,
2014a; Bacher-Hicks et al., 2014; Bau and Das, 2020) and has important consequences
(Chetty et al., 2014b). Teachers, however, impact a broad set of skills beyond those
measured by standardized tests (Jackson, 2018; Petek and Pope, 2021; Mulhern and
Opper, 2022). The skills rewarded in one domain, such as the labor market, may
diﬀer from those rewarded in another, implying that what makes a teacher “good”
depends on the outcome considered. Our results provide the ﬁrst evidence of teachers’
eﬀects on a life-altering and socially costly long-run outcome and show that the set
of short-run impacts that predict these eﬀects is strikingly diﬀerent than for teacher
eﬀects on adult earnings, complementing related work on the impacts of overall school
quality (Jackson et al., 2020; Bacher-Hicks et al., 2019; Jordan et al., 2024).
We also make progress methodologically by providing new tools for studying the
impacts of teachers. While recent work has suggested a variety of alternatives to
traditional EB estimators (e.g., Kwon, 2023; Chen, 2023; Giacomini et al., 2023), the
4

===== PAGE 6 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

results of any forecasting technique will depend simultaneously on how much teachers
impact outcomes and the researcher’s ability to accurately estimate those impacts. In
standard approaches, for example, the impacts of a one standard deviation increase in
teacher quality would change if estimated in the same data but dropping half of each
teacher’s observations, making it diﬃcult to reach ﬁrm conclusions about the relative
importance of teachers’ impacts across outcome dimensions and contexts. By directly
estimating the parameters of interest under weak assumptions, our approach sidesteps
these issues. Building on recent work by Kline et al. (2020), we also derive analytic
standard errors that avoid the complications of inference on generated regressors in
traditional two-step procedures. A Python implementation of our method is available
at https://pypi.org/project/ustat-var/.
Our work also connects to the literature on how student skills respond to investments
(Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha et al., 2010, 2021). That literature typically
exploits repeated, noisy measurements of latent skills (e.g., Agostinelli and Wiswall
(2025) use sub-tests of the Peabody Individual Achievement Test) and independence
restrictions to achieve identiﬁcation (Schennach, 2016; Cunha et al., 2021). Our focus
is similar in that we also seek to estimate distributions of latent parameters and use
long-run outcomes to anchor eﬀects on outcomes without a natural scale such as test
scores. However, we focus on teachers’ direct eﬀects on short- and long-run outcomes,
rather than estimating dynamic human capital production functions. As a result, we
do not explicitly model achievement and disciplinary outcomes as proxies for latent
underlying skill stocks. Our identiﬁcation arguments and estimation approach do
not rely on repeated, contemporaneous measurements, knowledge of investments, or
latent factor structures, and require generally weaker restrictions.
Finally, we contribute to the growing literature on whether teachers have a compara-
tive advantage in teaching certain students (Dee, 2005; Condie et al., 2014; Gershenson
et al., 2022; Delgado, 2021; Biasi et al., 2021; Bates et al., 2022). We document mean-
ingful heterogeneity in teachers’ direct eﬀects on long-run outcomes such as CJC or
college attendance. However, we also ﬁnd that latent teacher eﬀects on short-run
outcomes are highly correlated across students, suggesting there is limited teacher
comparative advantage for students’ performance on test scores, behaviors, and study
skills. Identifying strong predictors of teachers’ heterogeneous long-run eﬀects is an
important topic for future research.
5

===== PAGE 7 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

1 Data and setting
1.1 Education records
We utilize administrative education records provided by the North Carolina Education
Research Data Center (NCERDC). These data cover the universe of public school
students in the state from 1996 through 2013. Key data elements include test scores,
teacher and classroom assignments, demographic characteristics of students, parents,
and teachers, and disciplinary and attendance records.
Our analyses focus on the impacts of elementary and middle school teachers in grades
four through eight. In elementary school, students are usually assigned to a single
homeroom teacher, although some students have separate math and reading teachers.
In middle school, students typically have separate teachers for math and reading
courses. From 2006 onwards, the NCERDC provides “course membership” ﬁles that
directly link students to their teachers. Prior to 2006, we follow Rothstein (2017) and
use the identity of students’ test proctor to link students to their teachers. 3
1.1.1 The teacher assignment process
Typically, central administrators (e.g., the principal) assign students to teachers seek-
ing to balance class size, student ability, and student needs (e.g., special education
status). Our empirical strategy controls for the student characteristics used as po-
tential inputs in this process, such as the student’s academically gifted status and
behavioral or educational special needs, their lagged academic achievement, as well
as lagged school discipline and absences. A key concern is whether assignment also
depends on student characteristics we do not observe, leading to potentially biased
estimates of teachers’ causal eﬀects. We discuss tests of this issue using student
characteristics likely not used in the assignment process below.
Because students are not randomly assigned to schools or cohorts, and teacher quality
varies across both schools and time, our models will also control for year-grade-subject
ﬁxed eﬀects to proxy for the implicit “strata” at which administrators assign teachers
to students, and means of student characteristics at the school level to control for
between-school sorting. Finally, we include classroom means of student characteristics
to account for the possibility that some students are “tracked” into diﬀerent sets of
3Replicating this strategy in the post-2006 data conﬁrms that proctors provide a reliable source
of teacher identities.
6

===== PAGE 8 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

courses and teachers (e.g., the honors track) (Jackson, 2014).
1.1.2 Short-run outcome measures
We construct three primary measures of short-run outcomes from the NCERDC data.
The ﬁrst proxies for cognitive skills using scores on standardized state-wide examina-
tions in math and reading taken by all students. Test scores are normalized within
each year and grade to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in the full
student population. For homeroom teachers, we use the ﬁrst principal component of
math and reading scores as the relevant outcome. Math and reading scores are used
for math and reading teachers, respectively.
The second measure follows a large literature that uses student behaviors to proxy
for non-cognitive skills (Heckman et al., 2006; Lleras, 2008; Bertrand and Pan, 2013;
Petek and Pope, 2021). As in Jackson (2018), we take the ﬁrst principal component
of standardized indicators for school discipline (primarily in- and out-of-school sus-
pensions), days absent, and grade repetition in each year. Prior research documents
that these behaviors are strongly associated with important non-cognitive skills and
traits (e.g., Duckworth et al., 2007). Unlike test scores, eﬀects on these measures may
capture both changes in students’ behavior and teachers’ propensity to punish their
students or record absences. To isolate the former component, we measure suspen-
sions and absences the year after the student was assigned to a teacher (i.e., int+1). 4
We normalize the sign of the behavioral index so that improved behaviors (e.g., fewer
suspensions) correspond to more positive values of the index.
The third and ﬁnal measure uses data on students’ time spent on homework, reading,
and watching television, which we interpret as proxies for students’ study skills and
eﬀort. These variables are reported categorically with discretization that changes
year-to-year. We convert values to hours using the mid-point of each category and
normalize within grade and year. As with behaviors, we then combine the three
measures into a single summary index using the ﬁrst principal component. Although
test scores are available over the full panel, behaviors and study skill measures are
not. Absences are available for all students beginning in 2004, and disciplinary records
begin in 2001 for a subset of the schools and for all schools beginning in 2006. When
4Related work also uses grades as a behavioral measure (Jackson, 2018; Petek and Pope, 2021).
Since grades likely capture some of the skills also measured by test scores, we omit them from our
behavioral summary measure to focus estimates on non-cognitive skills.
7

===== PAGE 9 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

estimating teacher eﬀects on each outcome, we use all data available.
1.2 Criminal justice records
We use administrative information on arrests, charges, and sentencing from the NC
Administrative Oﬃce of the Courts (AOC). The data cover all cases disposed be-
tween 2006 and mid-2020 and include rich information on defendants, oﬀenses, initial
charges, convictions, and sentences. Because criminal charges in NC are initially ﬁled
by law enforcement oﬃcers (as opposed to prosecutors), the charges in these data
closely approximate arrests. In Charlotte-Mecklenburg County, where we have col-
lected arrest records directly from the Sheriﬀ, over 90% of arrests appear in the AOC
data.5
The data include a large set of oﬀenses ranging from speeding tickets to homicides.
We focus our analysis on actual criminal arrests as deﬁned by NC statutes, although
we also consider impacts on non-criminal traﬃc and municipal ordinance violations.
To examine eﬀects on the most severe categories of crimes, we also deﬁne indicators
for arrest for one of the Uniform Crime Reporting program’s index crimes: aggravated
assault, forcible rape, murder, robbery, arson, burglary, larceny/theft, or motor vehicle
theft. Throughout, we refer to outcomes in this data as indicators of “criminal justice
contact” rather than crime, since arrests can occur without commission of a crime and
vice versa. We focus on CJC between the ages of 16 to 21, allowing us to measure
CJC for a large number of cohorts in the education data. 6
1.3 Data linking
Education records were linked to criminal justice data on the basis of name and date of
birth.7 Since not all students are arrested as young adults, we do not expect 100% of
the education records to match the criminal justice data. Comparisons of our match
rates to external benchmarks suggest the link is accurate, however. Bacher-Hicks
et al. (2019), for example, estimate that 19% of Charlotte-Mecklenburg students are
arrested between the ages of 16 and 21, a ﬁgure close to our rate of criminal arrest
5The rest is non-arrest booking events recorded by the Sheriﬀ such as federal prisoner transfers.
6The age of criminal responsibility in NC was 16 until December 1st, 2019, when “Raise the Age”
legislation increased it to 18.
7We also experimented with using social security numbers, which are available for a subset of the
arrest records, and found similar match rates.
8

===== PAGE 10 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

reported below.8
1.4 Sample construction
Following Chetty et al. (2014a), we treat the student-subject-year as the unit of obser-
vation. Each row in our data therefore includes a student’s subject-speciﬁc outcomes
(e.g., their math test scores for the math subject), their assigned teacher, their be-
havioral and study skill outcomes for that year, and long-run outcomes. The full data
set constructed in this way includes 13 million observations. We drop teachers who
appear in multiple schools (0.7% of records) or grades (3.7%) in the same year, since
their students are likely only partially exposed to their potential eﬀects, alternative
and special education schools (0.1%), and students with an invalid contemporary or
lag math and reading score, which serve as crucial controls (8.4%). Finally, to mitigate
any potential mismatches of students to teachers, we keep teacher-subject pairs with
between 15 and 100 students per year (excluding a further 6.6% of observations).
1.5 Summary statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the ﬁnal analysis sample. The sample includes
9,779,708 student-subject-year observations for 1,953,547 students with 39,707 diﬀer-
ent teachers. Roughly 25% of the sample are black—close to the state average, 58%
are economically disadvantaged, 22% have a parent with a four-year college degree,
while 40% have a parent with a high-school education or less. Test scores are nor-
malized to be mean zero and have a standard deviation of one in the full population
of students. However, in the analysis sample (Columns 1 and 2) the average math
and reading test scores are slightly higher (0.061 and 0.046), primarily due to the
exclusion of students without a lag score. 17% of the students have some disciplinary
infraction in an average year and 8% have an out-of-school suspension.
Contact with the justice system is common. A quarter of the students have a criminal
arrest between ages 16 to 21. A substantial share of the children have a serious incident
between ages 16 to 21: 10% are arrested for an index crime, 10% are convicted of a
crime, and 9% are incarcerated (including both jail and prison). Columns 3 and 4
8Other benchmarks include Cook and Kang (2016), who estimate that 6% of the 1987-89 NC
birth cohorts were convicted of serious crimes between the ages of 17 and 19; Brame et al. (2014)’s
analysis of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, who ﬁnd a self-reported arrest rate between
the ages of 18 and 23 of 30% when non-response is treated as missing at random; and data from the
CJARS project (Papp and Mueller-Smith, 2021), which ﬁnds median felony conviction rates across
commuting zones comparable to our CJC rates.
9

===== PAGE 11 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

report statistics for the sub-sample of the students in cohorts for whom we observe
CJC outcomes. This sample is remarkably similar to our full analysis sample.
Table 1 also reports summary statistics for children who have a criminal arrest between
ages 16 and 21 (Columns 5 and 6). These students are more likely to be economically
disadvantaged, their parents have less education, and they are more likely to be
male and black. In terms of short-run measures, these children have lower academic
achievement, more disciplinary infractions, and more out-of-school suspensions. They
also have lower 12th grade GPA and are less likely to graduate.
2 Econometric framework
This section lays out the econometric framework we use to deﬁne and estimate teacher
eﬀects on short- and long-run outcomes and their correlation structure. We deﬁne the
population parameters and estimands ﬁrst, then turn to estimation. As is common in
the literature, the main results use a model where teachers have homogeneous eﬀects
on all students (Chetty et al., 2014a; Angrist et al., 2017), an assumption we later
relax. We defer details on tests of our identifying assumptions until after we have
presented the main results.
2.1 Causal and observational eﬀects of teachers
Consider a population of students indexed by i assigned to one of J possible teachers
in year t. Let Yijt denote the potential value of a generic outcome for student i
if assigned to teacher j at time t.9 Short-run outcomes, such as test scores, vary
across t within student. Long-run outcomes do not, but we preserve the t subscript
because Yijt reﬂect impacts of potential teacher assignment at time t conditional on
the student’s history as of time t. Let Xit denote the student’s exogenous observable
characteristics. If all potential outcomes were observed, they could be decomposed
into the causal eﬀects of teachers and student observed and unobserved heterogeneity
using regression:
Yijt = µj
Teacher eﬀects
+ X′
itγ
Observed heterogeneity
+ ϵijt
Unobserved heterogeneity
(1)
9Our unit of observations is a student-subject-year triplet. However, to simplify the notation and
exposition, we follow Chetty et al. (2014a) and focus on the case in which a student has only a single
teacher in each year. Alternatively, i can be deﬁned as indexing student-subject pair.
10

===== PAGE 12 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

where E[ϵijt] = E[ϵijtXit] = 0 by construction. We normalize the mean of µj to
be zero and include a constant, so that the average causal eﬀect on the outcome of
assignment to teacherj for a random student isE[Yijt|j]−E[Yijt] =µj. Teacher eﬀects
are therefore constant over time, an assumption we relax in robustness exercises.
Since E[µj] = 0, µj captures teacher j’s eﬀects relative to the average teacher. Since
Equation 1 is a simple linear projection of potential outcomes onto observables, as
written it imposes no additional structure on the nature of treatment eﬀects. In the
ﬁrst part of our analysis, however, we follow the prior literature and assume teacher
eﬀects are homogeneous across students, allowing us to write ϵijt =ϵit (Chetty et al.,
2014a; Angrist et al., 2017).
We deﬁne “observational” teacher eﬀects as the population projection version of Equa-
tion 1 that relates actual teacher assignments to realized outcomes:
Yit =
∑
j
αjDijt +X′
itΓ +uit (2)
where Dijt = 1 if student i is assigned to teacher j in year t and = 0 otherwise, and
Yit = ∑
jYijtDijt is student i’s realized outcome in year t. Equation 2 is a projection
deﬁned by the population requirement that E[uitDijt] = 0 ∀ j. Observational and
causal eﬀects of teachers only coincide, however, when E[ϵitDijt] = 0 ∀j, implying
that teacher assignments are uncorrelated with unobserved determinants of potential
outcomes. If this is the case, αj = µj∀j,γ = Γ, and uit = ϵit, and unbiased causal
eﬀects of teachers can be estimated using sample analogues of Equation 2. We call
this assumption conditional independence:
Assumption 1 Conditional independence: E[ϵitDijt] = 0∀j.
Conditional independence does not necessarily require random assignment of students
to teachers. Instead, teacher assignments must be uncorrelated with unobserved fac-
tors that inﬂuence outcomes. This assumption rules out, for example, some teachers
being systematically assigned students who are more likely to do well on standard-
ized tests than observationally similar peers regardless of their teacher. But it allows
teachers to be assigned students with diﬀerent observed or unobserved characteristics
so long as their inﬂuence on outcomes is accounted for by the controls. 10
10This distinction is important in light of Rothstein (2010)’s inﬂuential ﬁnding that teacher as-
signments are correlated with observables such as twice-lagged test scores in a subset of the same
NC data we use. Rothstein’s result is not necessarily inconsistent with Assumption 1.
11

===== PAGE 13 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

The consensus in the education literature is that Assumption 1 is a plausible restric-
tion due to the richness of available controls (Bacher-Hicks and Koedel, 2023). As
noted in Section 1.1.1, these controls both proxy for the student characteristics admin-
istrators use when making teacher assignments and account for student sorting across
schools and cohorts. In our case, the controls include year-grade-subject ﬁxed eﬀects;
third-order polynomials in lagged math and reading test scores interacted with grade
and subject; indicators for the student’s academically gifted status, behavioral or
educational special needs, economic disadvantage indicators, and English proﬁciency
status; race and gender; lagged school discipline and grade repetition indicators and
lagged days absent; and school and classroom means of lagged math and reading test
scores and student characteristics. If a variable is missing for a particular student, it
is replaced with zero and a dummy variable for missing is included.
We discuss several tests of Assumption 1 in what follows, all of which support its
validity. Nevertheless, we also consider a weaker assumption known as “forecast
unbiasedness” that allows for a restricted form of bias in teacher eﬀects:
Assumption 2 Forecast unbiased eﬀects: µj =αj +ηj and Cov(αj,ηj) = 0.
where ηj is the diﬀerence between causal and observational eﬀects. If observational
eﬀects were forecast unbiased and observed without measurement error, a regres-
sion of teachers’ causal eﬀects on their observational eﬀects would yield a coeﬃcient
of one. 11 Observational eﬀects are therefore unbiased linear predictors of causal ef-
fects. Assumption 2 requires that the causal eﬀects of teachers who appear high
quality given the students they are actually assigned cannot be systematically over-
or under-estimated. This restricted form of bias is plausible if high quality teachers
are sometimes assigned students likely to excel no matter what, but also sometimes
assigned students who face more challenges.
The discussion so far has considered a generic outcome Yit. In what follows, we
consider multiple short- and long-run outcomes, including math and reading test
scores, proxies for non-cognitive skills such as attendance and suspensions, and future
CJC. Each teacher is therefore characterized by vectors of causal and observational
eﬀectsµj ={µ1
j,µ 2
j,...,µ K
j} andαj ={α1
j,α 2
j,...,α K
j}, one for each of K outcomes.
11In practice, αj is estimated with error and ˆαj is not a forecast unbiased predictor of µj even if
Assumption 2 holds (i.e., projecting µj on ˆαj will not yield a coeﬃcient of one). We detail how we
overcome this issue when testing this assumption below.
12

===== PAGE 14 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Likewise, Assumptions 1 and 2 can be invoked for the causal and observational eﬀects
of teachers on each outcome separately.
2.2 Parameters of interest and estimation
We focus on estimating the variance-covariance matrix of observational teacher eﬀects
αj. The variance of elements of αj measures how important eﬀects are for particular
outcomes. The covariance of elementsαj measures how teachers’ impacts relate across
outcomes. Because αj are deﬁned as population projection coeﬃcients, they are easy
to consistently estimate using OLS. But these estimates will also be noisy. As a
result, the variance of ˆαj will overstate the true variance of αj. Due to correlated
sampling error across outcomes, sample covariances between elements of ˆαj may also
yield biased estimates of the covariances between elements of αj.
We use variations on established approaches to obtain unbiased estimates of latent
eﬀect variances and covariances (Kline et al., 2020). Our approach allows us to non-
parametrically characterize the distribution of teacher eﬀects without the use of an
intermediate shrinkage step or specifying a complete statistical model.
To begin, deﬁne the variance of teacher eﬀects (for a single generic outcome) as:
Var (αj) = 1
J
J∑
j=1
α2
j−

 1
J
J∑
j=1
αj


2
=
(J− 1
J
) 1
J
J∑
j=1
α2
j− 2 1
J2
J−1∑
j=1
J∑
k>j
αjαk (3)
where the second expression follows from expanding the squares and some careful
algebraic rearrangement. The key challenge in estimating Var (αj) is that the plug-in
estimator Var (ˆαj) will be biased because E[ˆα2
j] > E[ˆαj]2 by Jensen’s inequality. To
overcome this issue, we construct unbiased estimates ofα2
j for each teacher motivated
by a simple restriction on teacher-year mean population residuals from Equation 2.
Speciﬁcally, we assume that for ¯ujt = 1
njt
∑
i|j(i,t)=juit, where njt is the number of
students assigned to teacher j at time t, the following holds:
Assumption 3 Uncorrelated teacher-year residuals: E[¯ujt ¯ujt′] = 0∀j,t̸=t′
If Assumption 1 holds, then Assumption 3 can be understood as requiring that any
sorting on unobservables is uncorrelated across t for each teacher. This restriction is
not imposed by Assumption 1 alone, which simply requires that unobservable sorting
be mean zero for each teacher when averaging across all t. Assumption 3 rules out
13

===== PAGE 15 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

in addition any “runs” across years in unobserved student quality within teacher. It
is straightforward to relax Assumption 3, however, by assuming that it holds across
t separated by at least m years: E[¯ujt ¯ujt′] = 0∀j,|t−t′|≥ m. This allows for runs
that die out after at least m years, a possibility we explore further below.
The key ingredient in our estimator of Var (αj) is teacher-year mean residuals from
OLS estimates of Equation 2:
¯Yjt = 1
njt
∑
i|j(i,t)=j
Yit−X′
itˆΓ =αj + ˆ¯ujt
where ˆ¯ujt = ¯ujt + ¯X′
jt(Γ− ˆΓ) for ¯Xjt = 1
njt
∑
i|j(i,t)=jXit.12 Our estimator uses these
mean residuals as follows:
ˆVar (αj) =
(J− 1
J
) 1
J
J∑
j=1
(
Tj
2
)−1Tj−1∑
t=1
Tj∑
k=t+1
¯Yjt ¯Yjk− 2 1
J2·
J−1∑
j=1
J∑
k>j
¯Yj ¯Yk (4)
where Tj is the number of years observed for teacher j and ¯Yj = 1
Tj
∑Tj
t=1 ¯Yjt. This
estimator can be viewed as the second expression in Equation 3 with ¯Yj substituted
for αj and
(
Tj
2
)−1 ∑Tj−1
t=1
∑Tj
k=t+1 ¯Yjt ¯Yjk substituted for α2
j. The latter term is the
average product of mean residuals across all pairs of years for a given teacher.
Under Assumption 3, Et̸=t′
[¯Yjt ¯Yjt′
]
= α2
j because each residual consists of αj plus
uncorrelated noise. 13 Related estimators have been used in prior work to estimate
the variance of teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes, typically by taking the average
product of mean residuals across random pairs of classrooms (e.g., Kane and Staiger,
2008; Chetty et al., 2014a; Jackson, 2018). 14
12ˆΓ is estimated with teacher dummies as in Equation 2. This implies that the teacher-level means
of Yit−X′
itˆΓ are identical to estimates of teacher ﬁxed eﬀects obtained by estimating Equation 2
directly. They would not necessarily be identical if ˆΓ were estimated without teacher dummies, a
version of “improper” Frisch–Waugh–Lovell.
13Population residuals are estimated because Γ is not known. As a result, ¯X′
jt(Γ− ˆΓ) appears in
ˆ¯ujt. The presence of this term may generate bias if ¯Xjt is correlated across years within teacher
and Γ ̸= ˆΓ even under Assumption 3. Our very large sample makes estimation error in Γ small,
mitigating this concern. In fact, bias can be estimated because under Assumption 3 for any j and
t̸=t′, E[ ¯Yjt ¯Yjt′]−α2
j =E[ ¯X′
jt(Γ− ˆΓ)(Γ− ˆΓ)′ ¯Xjt′] = ¯X′
jtΣΓ ¯Xjt′. For test scores, this evaluates to
10−5 when averaged overall all j and t, implying a < 0.1% upwards bias in our estimated variance.
The same residualization approach is standard in related methods. When estimating two-way ﬁrm
and worker ﬁxed eﬀect models for log wages, for example, covariates such as year dummies are
commonly partialled out before estimating the variance of ﬁrm eﬀects (Kline et al., 2020).
14For example, Jackson (2018) used the estimatorEt,t′
[
1
J
∑J
j=1( ¯Yjt− ¯Yt)( ¯Yjt′− ¯Yt′)
]
and approx-
imated the expectation using the median value in 200 Monte Carlo simulations. Our estimator uses
all possible pairs of years within a teacher instead of simulations.
14

===== PAGE 16 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

ˆVar (αj) is also numerically equivalent to the variance of the estimated ˆ αj minus a
correction due to sampling variance based on the standard error of each ˆ αj (Kline
et al., 2020):
ˆVar (αj) = 1
J
J∑
j=1
(¯Yj− ¯Y
)2
  
Variance of
observed ˆαj
−
(
1− 1
J
) ˆσ2
j
Tj  
Correction for
sampling variation
(5)
where ¯Y = 1
J
∑J
j=1
¯Yj, and ˆσ2
j = 1
Tj−1
∑Tj
t=1( ¯Yjt− ¯Yj)2. Similar estimators have been
used in a variety of applications, including estimates of the variance of teacher eﬀects
(e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988; Aaronson et al., 2007; Kline et al., 2021).
Our second object of interest is the covariance of teacher eﬀects across outcomes.
Using test score and CJC eﬀects—αA
j andαC
j —as an example, this estimand is:
Cov(αA
j,αC
j ) = 1
J
J∑
j=1
αA
jαC
j −

 1
J
J∑
j=1
αA
j



 1
J
J∑
j=1
αC
j

 (6)
=
(J− 1
J
) 1
J
J∑
j=1
αA
jαC
j − 2 1
J2·
J−1∑
j=1
J∑
k>j
αA
jαC
j
where the second line again follows from expanding the product of sums and re-
arranging. Now the source of potential bias is correlated sampling error in teacher
eﬀects estimates across outcomes. Unlike variance estimation, where measurement
error leads to over-dispersion, correlated measurement error across outcomes can bias
covariance estimates in either direction.
Our covariance estimator is constructed assuming that a version of Assumption 3 holds
across outcomes. Speciﬁcally, we assume that for generic outcomes A and C:
Assumption 4 Uncorrelated cross-outcome-year residuals:E[¯uA
jt ¯uC
jt′] = 0∀j,t̸=t′
where ¯uk
jt are the teacher-year mean residuals from Equation 2 with outcomeYk
it on the
left-hand side. Much like ˆVar (αj), our covariance estimator exploits this restriction
by excluding products of mean residuals from the same year:
ˆCov(αA
j,αC
j ) =
(J− 1
J
) 1
J
J∑
j=1
1
T 2
j−Tj
Tj∑
t=1
Tj∑
k̸=t
¯YA
jt ¯YC
jk− 2 1
J2·
J−1∑
j=1
J∑
k>j
¯YA
j ¯YC
k (7)
where ¯Yk
jt and ¯Yk
j are deﬁned as above but for outcome Yk
it . As above, this estimator
can be viewed as Equation 6 with unbiased estimators of αA
jαC
j formed from average
15

===== PAGE 17 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

cross-year products for each j plugged in. It is also numerically equivalent to taking
the covariance of estimated eﬀects across outcomes and subtracting a correction for
within-teacher correlated measurement error:
ˆCov(αA
j,αC
j ) = 1
J
J∑
j=1
(¯YA
j − ¯YA) (¯YC
j − ¯YC)
  
Covariance of
observed ˆαA
j and ˆαC
j
−
(
1− 1
J
)σAC
j
Tj  
Correction for correlated
sampling variation
(8)
where σAC
j = 1
Tj−1
∑Tj
t=1
(
YA
jt− ¯YA
j
) (
YC
jt− ¯YC
j
)
.15
Comparison to alternative approaches . The prior literature often uses the co-
variance of EB posteriors to study how teachers’ impacts across multiple outcomes
or groups are related. Standard linear EB posteriors typically shrink observational
estimates towards the overall mean with weights related to each estimate’s sampling
variance. The variance of EB posteriors is generally smaller than the variance of latent
eﬀects as a result of this shrinkage step, however. This can make it diﬃcult to compare
eﬀects across groups or outcomes, since both the variance of latent eﬀects and degree
of shrinkage may be changing. In Appendix B, we show that the covariance of EB
posteriors across outcomes or student groups also does not identify the covariance in
latent true teacher eﬀects. A simple simulation calibrated to the variance-covariance
of teacher eﬀects and sampling error in our data illustrates the potential biases—the
covariances of EB posteriors across outcomes can be signiﬁcantly biased and wrongly
signed, even with over 1,000 student observations per teacher.
Inference. An additional beneﬁt of our approach is that it is possible to construct
analytic expressions for the sampling variances of the estimators in Equations 4 and 7,
as well as their sampling co-variances. Appendix C explains how. We use this result
to conduct inference instead of relying on bootstrap routines that may be misleading
in high-dimensional models (El Karoui and Purdom, 2018). Doing so also allows us to
avoid the inferential complications that arise when using EB posteriors as explanatory
variables in second-step regressions.
2.2.1 Interpretation under Assumption 1
When Assumption 1 holds, these estimators provide unbiased estimates of the variance-
covariance of causal eﬀects of teachers across outcomes because the distribution of
15So far, we assumed that all outcomes are observed in all the years. In Appendix C, we present
a generalization of our estimator that relaxes this requirement.
16

===== PAGE 18 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

observational (αj) and causal (µj) teacher eﬀects coincide.
2.2.2 Interpretation under Assumption 2
When only Assumption 2 holds, observational variance estimates provide a lower
bound on the variance of causal eﬀects, since Var (µj) =Var (αj) +Var (ηj) (Abaluck
et al., 2021). However, the diﬀerence between observational and causal covariance
estimates—e.g., between Cov(µA
j,µC
j ) and Cov(αA
j,αC
j )—depends on the correlation
in teacher-level bias across outcomes. For example, if biases are uncorrelated across
outcomes and with underlying causal eﬀects—e.g., Cov(ηA
j ,ηC
j ) = Cov(µA
j,ηC
j ) =
Cov(ηA
j ,µC
j ) = 0—the observational covariance equals the causal covariance.
It is possible that Assumption 1 holds for short-run outcomes such as test scores
but not for long-run outcomes such as CJC. In this case, observational and causal
covariances are related byCov(αA
j,αC
j ) =Cov(µA
j,µC
j )−Cov(µA
j,ηC
j ). They therefore
coincide whenever Cov(µA
j,ηC
j ) = 0, implying that bias in teacher eﬀects on future
CJC is orthogonal to teachers’ causal eﬀects on test scores. This expression also
makes the direction of any potential bias clear. It seems plausible, for example, that
the teachers with the most positive causal eﬀects on test scores are assigned the
students least likely to be arrested. This pattern would make estimated observational
correlations more negative than causal correlations. As we show below, however, we
estimate a near zero correlation between teachers’ test score and CJC eﬀects, leaving
little scope for large negative correlations in causal eﬀects.
3 The causal eﬀects of teachers
This section begins by estimating teacher eﬀects on students’ future CJC and other
long-run outcomes, as well as on short-run outcomes. We then examine the cor-
relation structure of eﬀects on short- and long-run outcomes. Finally, we conduct
multiple tests of Assumptions 1 and 2 to support the causal interpretation of our
estimates and demonstrate the robustness of our results to alternative speciﬁcations
and assumptions.
3.1 Eﬀects on future CJC
Table 2 presents the estimated variance-covariance of structure of teachers’ direct
eﬀects on long-run outcomes. The diagonal entries are standard deviations and the
oﬀ-diagonals are correlations. The ﬁrst four columns show eﬀects on four measures
17

===== PAGE 19 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

of CJC: any interaction (including traﬃc tickets and other non-criminal violations),
criminal arrests, arrests for index crimes, and incarceration. The ﬁnal three columns
show eﬀects on 12th grade GPA (measured on a six point scale), graduation, and
plans for four-year college attendance.
Teacher eﬀects on future CJC are large. A one standard deviation increase in eﬀects
would increase the likelihood of future criminal arrest, arrests for index crimes, and
incarceration by 0.027, 0.018, and 0.021 p.p., respectively, or 11.25%, 18%, and 23.6%
of the outcome mean. Teacher eﬀects are thus larger proportionally for more severe
CJC outcomes. Substantial eﬀects on both severe crimes and more minor crimes (e.g.,
traﬃc tickets) suggest broad inﬂuence on criminal behavior as opposed to increased
ability to evade detection in crime categories with low clearance rates. Eﬀects on 12th
grade GPA, graduation, and college attendance are also large with, for example, an
estimated standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on the latter of roughly 0.05 p.p.
Eﬀects on these long-run outcomes are correlated in ways one would expect. Teachers
who decrease their students’ odds of future CJC also make them more likely to attend
college and to have better grades as seniors. Moreover, teachers’ eﬀects on future
arrests are positively correlated with their eﬀects on the probability of incarceration, as
would be expected given that incarceration typically requires a preceding arrest.
3.2 Eﬀects on short-run outcomes
Table 3 presents estimates of the variance-covariance structure of teacher eﬀects on
short-run outcomes based on the estimators in Equations 4 and 7. The diagonal
entries reﬂect estimated standard deviations for the outcome in the row/column. The
oﬀ-diagonals are estimated correlations of eﬀects on the row/column outcomes. The
top-left entry, for example, shows that the estimated standard deviation of teacher
eﬀects on test scores—combining homeroom, math, and reading teachers—is 0.121.
Since test scores are normalized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one
in the full population of students, this means that a one standard deviation increase in
teacher test score quality increases students’ scores by 12.1% of a standard deviation
on average. The following two columns break test score eﬀects into eﬀects on math
and reading. As in other studies, we estimate a standard deviation of teacher reading
eﬀects that is roughly half as large as teachers’ math eﬀects. 16
16Figure A.1 shows these estimates are comparable to results from other recent studies.
18

===== PAGE 20 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

The fourth column of Table 3 shows wide variation in teacher eﬀects on study skills.
The estimated standard deviation is 0.183. Unsurprisingly, study skills eﬀects are cor-
related with eﬀects on test scores (0.317), suggesting teachers whose students complete
more homework and substitute from watching television to reading also tend to see
increases in test scores.
The ﬁfth column shows that the estimated standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on
behaviors is 0.125. Recall that the behavioral index is normalized to have a standard
deviation of one in our sample, so this estimate also implies that a standard devia-
tion increase in teacher behavioral eﬀects improves behaviors by 12.5% of a standard
deviation of the outcome. Interestingly, teacher eﬀects on behaviors are only weakly
correlated with teacher eﬀects on test scores. The correlation between behavioral
eﬀects and overall test score eﬀects, for example, is 0.056. Similarly, behaviors and
study skills eﬀects are only weakly related with a correlation of 0.033. While perhaps
surprising, similar results have been found in other contexts. Jackson (2018) and
Petek and Pope (2021) ﬁnd a correlation of 0.15 between teacher value-added on a
behavioral index and test scores. 17
3.3 Predicting teacher eﬀects
Table A.1 examines how teacher eﬀects on short- and long-run outcomes correlate
with their demographic and professional observables. In our framework, predicting
teacher eﬀects is straightforward since ¯Yk
jt or ¯Yk
j can be simply regressed on covari-
ates without further adjustment. We ﬁnd relatively few strong predictors of teacher
impacts. Female, older, better paid, and stronger testing teachers have larger test
score eﬀects, for example, but diﬀerences are relatively small. The strongest predictor
is likely experience, with coeﬃcients that imply an additional 10 years predicts 0.03
higher test score eﬀects. There are few signiﬁcant predictors of teachers’ long-run
criminal justice impacts, although female, non-white, and lower-paid teachers tend to
have more crime-reducing impacts.
17Petek and Pope (2021) is the only other estimate, to our knowledge, of the correlation between
teacher eﬀects on study skills and test scores or a behavioral index. Interestingly, they ﬁnd the
opposite pattern: a strong correlation between teacher eﬀects on learning skills and behaviors (0.459)
and a weaker correlation between learning skills and test score teacher value-added (0.174). Study
skills are measured in diﬀerent ways in Petek and Pope (2021), possibly explaining the diﬀerences.
19

===== PAGE 21 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

3.4 Connecting short- and long-run eﬀects
One way to summarize the relationship between long- and short-run eﬀects is the
coeﬃcient from a regression of the former on the latter—e.g., for long-run outcome
C and short-run outcome A,
Cov(αC
j ,αA
j )
Var (αA
J ) . Using our methods, it is straightforward to
obtain a plug-in estimate of this object. Figure 1 reports these estimates for the long-
and short-run outcomes studied above. Each coeﬃcient has been re-scaled by the
standard deviation of short-run outcome eﬀects so that they can be interpreted as the
implied impact on the long-run outcome of exposing a student to a teacher with one
standard deviation higher eﬀects on the short-run outcome.
The signs of eﬀects are normalized so that the hypothetical change always results in an
improvement in the short-run outcome (e.g., higher test scores, fewer suspensions).
The bars are grouped by short-run outcome, with each bar showing the estimated
eﬀect on each long-run outcome. The ﬁgures above the bars report eﬀects as a per-
centage of the outcome’s baseline mean. Because we measure the variance-covariance
structure of latent teacher eﬀects, these estimates reﬂect impacts of assignment to
teachers whose actual impacts on the short-run outcome are one standard deviation
higher. We return to the costs of needing to estimate individual teachers’ eﬀects in
ﬁnite samples in the last section of the paper.
Panel (a) presents the results for any CJC, criminal arrests, index crime arrests, and
incarceration. Consistent with the small estimated correlations, shifting students to
teachers who increase test scores has limited impacts on future arrests. Eﬀects on any
CJC and criminal arrests are small, with conﬁdence intervals that include zero. Eﬀects
on arrests for index crimes and incarceration are larger but still no more than 0.7
percentage points. Teachers’ eﬀects on study skills show similar patterns, with eﬀects
statistically indistinguishable from zero. For the purposes of recruiting, retaining,
or rewarding teachers who help their students avoid criminal careers, therefore, test
score and study skill value-added is not likely to be a particularly useful metric.
Unlike CJC outcomes, we ﬁnd that teachers who increase test scores do increase
students’ 12th grade GPA, their likelihood of graduation, and their plans to attend
four-year college. The estimated eﬀect of a one standard deviation shift in teacher
quality on the latter is roughly 1.3% (roughly 0.6 p.p., similar to the estimated impact
20

===== PAGE 22 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

on actual college attendance in Chetty et al. (2014b) of 0.86 p.p.). 18
By contrast, Panel (b) shows that exposing students to teachers with more positive
eﬀects on behaviors has a large impact on future CJC. A one standard deviation shift
in behavioral eﬀects is associated with a 2.3% decrease in the likelihood of a criminal
arrest and a 3% reduction in the likelihood of being incarcerated between ages 16 to
21. Teacher quality measured through their impacts on these outcomes, therefore, is
very relevant for improving students’ long-run criminal justice outcomes. 19
Tables A.2 and A.3 show that we ﬁnd similar patterns but diﬀerent magnitudes when
using conventional methods that regress students’ future CJC outcomes on assigned
teachers’ value-added estimated in a multi-step EB procedure. For example, assign-
ment to a teacher with a one standard deviation higher test score value-added reduces
future criminal arrests by 0.08 p.p. By contrast, our estimate is 0.023 p.p., more than
three times smaller and not statistically signiﬁcant. Conventional estimates suggest
assignment to a one standard deviation better behavioral value-added teacher reduces
arrests by 0.08 p.p., whereas our estimate implies eﬀects roughly twice as large.
3.5 Multivariate relationships between teacher eﬀects
Estimates of the variance-covariance structure of teacher eﬀects can be used to es-
timate the infeasible regression of teachers’ eﬀects on CJC on all of their short-run
eﬀects simultaneously:
αC
j =β0αA
j +β1αB
j +β2αS
j +ej
where superscripts A,B , and S indicate eﬀects on test scores, behaviors and study
skills, respectively. β = (β0 β1 β2)′ is straightforward to calculate given variance-
covariance estimates, since:
β =E[(αA
j αB
j αS
j )′· (αA
j αB
j αS
j )]−1E[(αA
j αB
j αS
j )′αC
j ]
18It is possible that teachers’ eﬀects on future instead of contemporaneous test scores better
measure their inﬂuence on cognitive skills (Gilraine and Pope, 2021). Figure A.2 shows the long-run
impacts of teacher quality as measured by their impacts on test scores and study skills in year t + 1.
These estimates generally show larger impacts, although teacher impacts on behaviors continue to
be associated with substantially larger future reductions in CJC.
19Part of the long-run eﬀects of exposure to teachers with positive eﬀects on behaviors may ﬂow
through development of certain skills and part may ﬂow through the impacts of the behavior itself.
Bacher-Hicks et al. (2019), for example, ﬁnd that assignment to schools with more strict discipline
policies results in more criminal justice contact. Sorensen et al. (2019) report similar ﬁndings.
Consistent with our results, Bacher-Hicks et al. (2019) also ﬁnd that schools that improve test scores
do not impact future arrests or incarceration.
21

===== PAGE 23 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table 4 presents estimates of β. Consistent with Figure 1, horse-racing the short-
run eﬀects shows that the key predictor of teachers’ CJC eﬀects is their eﬀects on
behaviors. Test score eﬀects have a negligible relationship with eﬀects on future CJC,
while behavioral eﬀects have a much larger one. For 12th grade GPA, graduation,
and college attendance, both eﬀects matter independently and substantially.
Given estimates of the total variation in eﬀects on long-run outcomes from Table 2,
it is straightforward to calculate the implied R2 from these regressions. For criminal
arrests, theR2 is 0.042, while for college attendance it is 0.02. Thus, only a small share
of the total variance in long-run teacher eﬀects is jointly explained by their short-run
eﬀects. This result implies that while behavioral eﬀects are strongly correlated with
criminal arrests, teachers also impact CJC in many ways orthogonal to their impacts
on suspensions, attendance and grade repetition. The same is true to an even greater
degree for 12th grade GPA, high school graduation, and college attendance. Any
policy focused on these short-run outcomes will therefore likely neglect substantial
heterogeneity in teachers’ importance for each of these long-run outcomes.
3.6 Validating eﬀects
In this section, we present multiple analyses that support the causal interpretation
of eﬀects on both short- and long-run outcomes. The robustness analyses include
tests for omitted variable bias, checks for forecast unbiasedness, analyses that relax
Assumption 1 and allow for unrestricted school eﬀects, and investigations of sensitivity
to diﬀerent speciﬁcation and modeling choices.
3.6.1 Omitted variables tests of Assumption 1
Interpreting teacher eﬀects as causal under Assumption 1 requires that student unob-
servables relevant for the outcomes studied are conditionally uncorrelated with teacher
assignments. A natural test of this assumption is to assess the sensitivity of teacher
eﬀect estimates to the inclusion of proxies for these unobservables (Altonji et al.,
2005). To do so, we follow Chetty et al. (2014a) and study the impact of controls
excluded from the original model because they are likely unobserved or unused by ad-
ministrators making teacher assignments. Chetty et al. (2014a) use parental income
from merged tax records; we use information on parental education, deeper test score
lags, and family ﬁxed eﬀects.
To deﬁne the test, consider the “long” regression model that includes the additional
22

===== PAGE 24 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

controlsWit:
Yit =
∑
j
˜αjDijt +X′
it˜Γ +W′
itρ + ˜uit (9)
The canonical omitted variable bias formula implies that the sensitivity of ˆαj to the
omission of Wit is identiﬁed by a regression of W′
itρ on Dijt. Likewise, the sensitivity
of the relationship between ˆαit = ∑
j ˆαjDijt and outcomes is identiﬁed by a regression
of W′
itρ on ˆαit.20 Critically, it must be that Var (W′
itρ)> 0, otherwise such tests will
show no sensitivity mechanically. We show below, however, that our omitted variables
are strongly predictive of outcomes conditional on the regular controls Xit, and are
therefore potentially useful proxies for student unobservables.
Results: Figure 2 depicts the correlation between estimated teacher eﬀects (ˆ αit =∑
j ˆαjDijt) and predicted outcomes (ˆYit =W′
itˆρ) using twice-lagged test scores, parental
education, and family ﬁxed eﬀects for twins as omitted variables. 21 Estimates of
teacher eﬀects come from OLS estimates of Equation 2 with our standard set of con-
trols. Estimates of ρ come from OLS estimates of Equation 9.
For all outcomes, teacher eﬀects are uncorrelated with predicted outcomes. The mag-
nitude of each slope coeﬃcient is extremely small. The slope coeﬃcient for any crim-
inal arrest between ages 16-21, for example, is 0.00135, implying that the impact of a
one standard deviation increase in teacher eﬀects on future arrests ( σy = 0.027—see
Table 2) may be biased by 0.027·0.00135 = 0.000036 due to omitted variables. Similar
results hold for test scores, behaviors, and long-run outcomes, as is shown in Figure
A.3 and Tables A.4, and A.5.). Results change little when regressing ˆYit on ˆαit in a
sample that includes only twins.
Columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table A.4 demonstrate that these omitted variables strongly
predict test scores, behavioral measures, and study skills. 22 Table A.5 reports analo-
gous estimates for long-term CJC outcomes. The patterns are similar. Reassuringly,
the omitted variables are especially predictive of criminal arrests, our main outcome
20These are the “short” regressions. Any sensitivity of observational estimates to omitted variables
may occur due to either sorting bias or heterogeneous eﬀects of teachers. Including additional controls
in the model implicitly changes the conditional variance of Dijt and the types of students—in terms
of their Xit—given most weight in estimating each teacher’s eﬀects. Although we ﬁnd that our
primary estimates are not sensitive to omitted variables, we extend the model to allow for potential
heterogeneity in teacher eﬀects in the ﬁnal part of the paper.
21Non-twins are also included and grouped into a single ﬁxed eﬀect.
22Columns 2, 4, and 6 report the regression coeﬃcients underlying Figure 2.
23

===== PAGE 25 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

of interest. Including them in the teacher eﬀect speciﬁcation increases the R2 from
0.089 to 0.107, a 20% increase in the model’s explanatory power.
We emphasize that the identifying assumption in our model is not that teachers are
conditionally randomly assigned. Instead, Assumption 1 requires only that teacher
assignments are conditionally mean independent of the relevant unobservables. Al-
though Rothstein (2010) shows that teacher assignments are correlated with twice-
lagged scores, the preceding exercises show that including these variables in the model
does not impact estimated teacher eﬀects, consistent with Assumption 1 and the ar-
guments in Chetty et al. (2016, 2017) and Jackson (2018).
3.6.2 Instrumental variable tests of Assumptions 1 and 2
Deﬁne the population projection of teachers’ causal onto observational eﬀects as:
µj =λαj +ηj
Assumption 1 implies that λ = 1 and ηj = 0 ∀j. Assumption 2 implies only that
λ = 1. With an appropriate instrument, it is possible to test whether λ = 1. To see
how, consider the relationship between estimated observational eﬀects and outcomes
implied by the causal model:
Yit =λˆαit +X′
itγ +ϵit +ηit +λξit (10)
where ˆαit = ∑
j ˆαjDijt, ˆαj =αj−ξj,ξit = ∑
jξjDijt, and ηit = ∑
jηjDijt.
OLS estimates of λ are inappropriate because ˆαit may be correlated with ϵit, ηit, and
ξit. In fact, if ˆαit is estimated in the same data as Equation 10, ˆλ = 1 mechanically.
However, given an instrumentZit that is relevant (i.e., Cov(Zit, ˆαit)̸= 0) and exclud-
able (i.e., Cov(Zit,ϵit) =Cov(Zit,ηit) =Cov(Zit,ξit) = 0), it is possible to estimate λ
using 2SLS.23
We use teacher switches across schools and grades to develop instruments. Intuitively,
these tests ask whether teachers’ impacts when they enter a new school or school-grade
match what we would predict based on their impacts in other places. To deﬁne the
instrument, let Eit be an indicator for whether a new teacher enters school-grade
sg(i,t ). Let ˜αsgt be the mean of ˆαj for all new teachers in sg and time t, where ˆαj is
estimated using all school-grades except sg. The instrument at the school-grade level
23Angrist et al. (2017) develop related tests for bias in observational estimates of school eﬀects
using lottery-based admissions oﬀers. Since we use a single instrument, our test is equivalent to the
“omnibus” test for bias they propose.
24

===== PAGE 26 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

is Zit =Eit ˜αsg(i,t)t and is deﬁned analogously at the school level. 24
We assume that new teacher entry is uncorrelated with student unobservables, or
Cov(Zit,ϵit) = 0. Because the instrument is deﬁned at the school-grade (or school)
level, any within school-grade (or school) sorting is not a concern. This assump-
tion rules out, however, teachers with higher estimated eﬀects systematically enter-
ing schools or school-grades where students are more likely to excel on average. 25
We also assume that the instrument is uncorrelated with teacher-level bias (i.e.,
Cov(Zit,ηit) = 0) and estimation error in teacher eﬀects (i.e., Cov(Zit,ξit) = 0).
Estimating ˜αsgt using all school-grades beside sg bolsters this assumption.
Results: Table 5 reports estimates of λ using teacher switches at the school and
school-grade level. Panel (a) shows that for all short-run outcomes we cannot reject
λ = 1. For test scores, for example, the point estimate using teacher switches across
school-grades is 1.002 (0.012). Estimates for behavioral measures and study skills are
similar, but slightly less precise due to the shorter panel over which they are observed.
Estimates for teachers’ direct eﬀects on long-run outcomes in Panel (b) are likewise
consistent with no bias. In each case, we cannot reject λ = 1, although λ is less
precisely estimated than for short-run outcomes. 26
The appendix contains several variations on Table 5 that probe the robustness of
these results. Table A.6, for example, demonstrates that we also cannot reject un-
biased eﬀects when school-grade ﬁxed eﬀects are included, so that only variation in
which teachers are assigned to a given school-grade is exploited. Table A.7 shows
the sensitivity of our estimates of λ for our primary long-run outcome, any criminal
arrests, with increasingly ﬁne-grained sets of ﬁxed eﬀects, and demonstrates that the
instrument is uncorrelated with predicted outcomes based on parental education and
twice-lagged test scores.27
24Chetty et al. (2014a) and Bacher-Hicks et al. (2014) exploit changes in estimated teacher eﬀects
and changes in outcomes within a school-grade to estimateλ. This approach is equivalent to stacking
the data for each pair of consecutive years, controlling for school-grade-pair eﬀects, and using the
interaction of school-grade indicators and indicator for the second year in each pair as the instrument.
Since this approach exploits many instruments, an important concern is whether a weak ﬁrst stage
may bias estimates towards the OLS estimate of 1.
25This assumption need hold only conditional our standard student-level controls, as well as addi-
tional ones such as district-grade-year ﬁxed eﬀects.
26The large ﬁrst-stage F-statistics reported at the bottom of the table also indicate that the
instruments induce substantial variation in exposure to high and low quality teachers.
27Although Rothstein (2017) argues that teacher switches in NC are correlated with student pre-
25

===== PAGE 27 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

3.6.3 Are teacher eﬀects actually school eﬀects?
To show that our estimates are not confounded by omitted school eﬀects, we conduct
two complementary analyses. The ﬁrst allows for arbitrary sorting of students within
a school, but assumes that any within-school bias is uncorrelated across schools. The
second allows for arbitrary sorting of teachers across schools but assumes that assign-
ment of teachers to students within a school satisﬁes Assumption 1.
To conduct the ﬁrst exercise, we use teachers who switch schools and examine the
relationship between their short- and long-run eﬀects on students in diﬀerent schools.
If school eﬀects drove our estimates, we would expect meaningful attenuation, since
these schools would likely have diﬀerent impacts on student outcomes.
The variance-covariance estimators are analogous to those in Equations 4 and 7:
(J− 1
J
) 1
J
J∑
j=1
(
Sj
2
)−1Sj−1∑
s=1
Sj∑
k=s+1
¯Yjs ¯Yjk− 2· 1
J2·
J−1∑
j=1
J∑
k>j
¯Yj ¯Yk (11)
whereSj is the number of schools where teacherj is employed and ¯Yjs is the teacher’s
mean residual in schools, or 1
njs
∑
t|s(j,t)=s
∑
i|j(i,t)=jYit−X′
itˆΓ wherenjs is the number
of students taught byj in schools. Only teachers who move across schools, i.e., those
with Sj≥ 2, are included.
In addition to testing for omitted school eﬀects, the estimator deﬁned in Equation 11
signiﬁcantly weakens our assumptions by allowing for arbitrary sorting of students to
teachers within a school. It rules out however, common sorting across schools, such
as a scenario where students who are more likely to excel on standardized tests are
assigned to teacher j both in school A and in school B to a similar degree.
Results: Table A.8 reports coeﬃcient estimates from the infeasible regression of long-
on short-run eﬀects using this approach. As in the baseline estimates, behavioral
eﬀects are strongly related to eﬀects on future CJC, while test score eﬀects are not.
The impact of a one standard deviation increase in teacher behavioral eﬀects is similar
to our baseline estimate. The standard deviations of teachers’ direct eﬀects on long-
run outcomes are smaller for some outcomes, but still large. The standard deviation
of eﬀects on any criminal arrest, for example, is 1.9 p.p. (vs. 2.7 in the baseline
paredness, our tests only require switches to be conditionally orthogonal to unobserved determinants
of outcomes. Table A.7 shows that this holds for CJC.
26

===== PAGE 28 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

model).28
Our second robustness analysis estimates the variance-covariance of latent teacher
eﬀects on all outcomes separately for each school using Equation 4 and computes
the teacher-weighted average. These estimates exploit purely within-school variation,
washing out any school eﬀects along with any between-school variation in eﬀects.
Results: Table A.9 reports the implied regression coeﬃcients summarizing the rela-
tionship between short- and long-run eﬀects using this approach. Estimates are very
similar to those in Table 4. Teachers’ eﬀects on behaviors strongly predict eﬀects on
long-run CJC outcomes, while their eﬀects on test scores are not. The total variance
of teachers’ direct eﬀects on each long-run outcome is naturally lower, reﬂecting the
fact that we have excluded all between-school variation.
3.6.4 Sensitivity to Assumptions 3 and 4
Table A.10 explores how our key results change when varying the gap between years
required for Assumptions 3 and 4 to hold. Adjusting the maximum gap, such that
E[¯uA
jt ¯uC
jt′] = 0 ∀j,t ̸= t′,|t−t′|≤ ¯m, is useful for assessing the importance of drift.
If teacher eﬀects change substantially over time, setting a smaller ¯ m should lead
to larger estimated variances. Adjusting the minimum gap, such that E[¯uA
jt ¯uC
jt′] =
0∀j,t̸=t′,|t−t′|≥ m, is useful for assessing sensitivity to short-lived runs in student
unobservables. The results show a striking degree of stability across ¯ m and m. The
estimated standard deviations of teacher eﬀects on test scores, behaviors, and criminal
justice outcomes change little across assumptions. Our core conclusion that teacher
eﬀects on criminal justice outcomes are weakly correlated with test score eﬀects and
strongly correlated with behavioral eﬀects is robust to a wide range of choices.
3.6.5 Speciﬁcation robustness
Even if the controls included in our model are suﬃcient to account for student observ-
ables and unobservables correlated with teacher assignments, our main speciﬁcation
makes several choices over both which speciﬁc variables to use and functional form.
To explore how sensitive our results are to these modeling choices, we estimate a large
number of speciﬁcations using 811 diﬀerent potential sets of controls and, in each case,
construct estimates of the impact of a one standard deviation increase in a teacher’s
28Because the set of teachers who switch schools may be diﬀerent than the overall population,
there is no reason to expect direct eﬀect variances to be identical to the primary estimates.
27

===== PAGE 29 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

test score and behavioral eﬀects on the likelihood of a future criminal arrest. 29 The
results reported in Figure A.4 show that our preferred speciﬁcation is not an outlier.
For test scores eﬀects, our preferred estimate is close to the median estimate found
when including most potential controls. For behavioral eﬀects, the estimate is among
the most conservative possible.
4 Heterogeneous eﬀects
The preceding analysis assumes that teacher eﬀects are the same across students and
schools. It is possible, however, that some teachers excel at reaching particular types
of students or adjust their teaching priorities based on the classroom environment. To
examine this question, we extend the model in Equation 2 to allow for heterogeneous
teacher eﬀects:
Yijt =
∑
j
(
µj +U′
itβj
)
Dijt +X′
itΓ +ϵit
whereUit is a subset ofXit, such as race, gender, or socio-economic status normalized
to be mean zero. Teacher eﬀects depend on these observables, with µj(x) =µj +x′βj
denoting teacher j’s eﬀects on students with observables x. Estimating this model
allows us to estimate the variance-covariance structure of teachers’ eﬀects within and
across groups.
The estimation strategy laid out in Section 2.2 makes incorporating heterogeneity in
teacher eﬀects simple. For example, to estimate the covariate in teacher eﬀects on
test scores between boys and girls, all that is needed is to change the teacher-year
average residuals in Equation 7 to be of boys test scores in one year and girls test
scores in another year, rather than of test scores and CJC.
We focus on four sets of student characteristics: white vs. non-white students, boys vs.
girls, students who are economically disadvantaged vs. not, and student with above
vs. below median predicted arrest risk. Table A.11 presents averages of student
characteristics and short- and long-run outcomes for these groups. A few disparities
are worth noting. White students are meaningfully less likely to have CJC than non-
white students, including a seven p.p. (33%) lower likelihood of a criminal arrest and
3.7 p.p. (51%) lower likelihood of being incarcerated. Similarly, girls and students
from higher socioeconomic backgrounds have lower CJC rates.
29Study skills eﬀects are omitted for brevity and to speed computation.
28

===== PAGE 30 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Wide variation in the incidence of CJC suggests that teacher eﬀects on CJC may vary
considerably across groups. Table A.13 presents estimates of teacher eﬀects on CJC
outcomes for diﬀerent students. Eﬀect variances are often larger for groups with a
higher prevalence of CJC, but remain substantial for all student types and for both
moderate and more serious contact types. Columns 1 and 2, for example, show that
teacher eﬀects are more dispersed for non-white than for white students. Estimates
are similar, however, for some groups with large diﬀerences in baseline CJC rates. The
standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on criminal arrests is 2.72 p.p. for economically
disadvantaged students and 2.97 p.p for non-disadvantaged students, despite a nearly
100% diﬀerence in average arrest rates.
Even if teacher eﬀects vary widely in multiple sub-populations, any individual teacher’s
eﬀects may diﬀer across students. Figure 3 examines this possibility by plotting the
correlation of teachers’ eﬀects across student types. For test scores and study skills,
we ﬁnd remarkably high correlations. Teachers’ eﬀects on boys vs. girls, white vs.
non-white students, economically disadvantaged vs. not disadvantaged students, and
students with above vs. below median predicted arrest risk all have correlations of
about 0.9. Eﬀects on behaviors are also strongly correlated, although less so. For
example, the correlation of eﬀects on boys vs. girls is roughly 0.75. Good teachers, as
measured by short-run outcomes, thus appear to largely be good for everyone.
Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 3 show that teachers’ eﬀects on long-run outcomes, how-
ever, display much weaker correlations for some groups. The correlation of eﬀects on
white and non-white students’ criminal arrests, for example, is roughly 0.5. As noted
earlier, teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes explain a small share of the variation in
eﬀects on long-run outcomes. Teachers’ impacts on students through channels poten-
tially uncorrelated to short-run outcomes are therefore highly heterogeneous. 30
Finally, we connect these estimates by calculating the implied eﬀects on long-run
outcomes of exposing students to teachers with higher student type-speciﬁc quality.
Figure 4 shows that across various groups, teachers who improve behaviors also reduce
the likelihood of future arrests and incarceration. However, as Figure A.5 shows,
30Table A.12 shows little evidence of a strong demographic match component to either short- or
long-run eﬀects. For test scores, female teachers have marginally higher relative eﬀects on girls’
and non-white teachers have marginally higher eﬀects on non-white students. Non-white teachers
also tend to reduce crime less for boys, although there is no evidence that teacher race predicts
heterogeneous eﬀects on criminal justice outcomes by student race.
29

===== PAGE 31 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

across all student types teachers who improve test scores do not reduce CJC. The
results highlight the generality of the ﬁndings in Figure 1.
5 Implications for teacher retention policies
There has been substantial discussion of how teachers’ impacts on student outcomes
can be incorporated into retention policies (Rothstein, 2010; Neal, 2011; Chetty et al.,
2014a). Ideally, a district would evaluate teachers based on their impacts on students’
long-run well being. Doing so is not typically feasible, however, since long-run out-
comes are by deﬁnition not observed for many years. As a result, in practice teachers
are evaluated using their impacts on short-run outcomes such as test scores.
To demonstrate the implications of our ﬁndings for policy, we compare the potential
impacts of policies that replace the worst-performing teachers based on various mea-
sures with an average teacher. Since there are multiple relevant long-run outcomes, we
construct possibility frontiers that illustrate the tradeoﬀs from emphasizing diﬀerent
measures of teacher quality.31
We begin with the ideal (and infeasible) measures that directly capture teachers’
eﬀects on long-run outcomes. Speciﬁcally, consider a district that seeks to increase
college attendance and reduce criminal arrests. As demonstrated above, teachers who
increase the former do not necessarily reduce the latter. Denote the weighted average
of teacher eﬀects on college attendance (µA
j ) and on future criminal arrests (µC
j , signed
such that positive values indicate crime reductions) by:
Indexlong-run
j =ωµC
j + (1−ω)µA
j, ω ∈ [0, 1] (12)
By varying ω, it is straightforward to trace out potential gains from replacing the
5% of teachers with the lowest Index long-run
j . The rightmost dotted curve in Figure
5 reports the results of this exercise. If long-run eﬀects were directly observed, the
district could achieve increases in college attendance of up to 10 p.p. and decreases
in criminal arrests of up to 5 p.p. for exposed students. Naturally, increasing one
outcome requires reducing eﬀects on the other. Where a district should locate on this
frontier depends on their preferences over these long-run goals.
Since teachers’ long-run eﬀects are not observed, these estimates represent an upper
31To provide a simple connection between our variance estimates and the relevant quantities for
these simulations, throughout this section we assume that teacher eﬀects are normally distributed.
Appendix D presents more details on the calculations of each policy counterfactual.
30

===== PAGE 32 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

bound on what any policy could achieve. In practice, districts must rely on teacher’s
impacts on short-run outcomes to proxy for teacher quality. The next set of lines in
Figure 5 demonstrates the maximum feasible gains from doing so. We construct a
weighted average of eﬀects on test scores ( µT
j ), behaviors (µB
j ), and study skills (µS
j )
as:
Indexshort-run
j =ω1µT
j +ω2µB
j + (1−ω1−ω2)µS
j (13)
and examine the impacts of replacing the bottom 5% scoring teachers with the average
teacher for diﬀerent values of ω1∈ [0, 1] and ω2∈ [0, 1], where ω1 +ω2≤ 1.
The red dashed line in Figure 5 reports the results of these exercises. Using eﬀects
on short-run outcomes, the district could achieve increases of nearly 2 p.p. in college
attendance and decreases of no more than about 1 p.p. in criminal arrests for exposed
students. Thus, while there are still meaningful potential improvements in long-run
outcomes, the frontier lies far to the interior of the infeasible policy.
The green triangle, blue square, and purple circle show the impacts of placing full
weight on study skills, behaviors, or test scores, respectively. The score that maxi-
mizes impacts on future CJC places almost full weight on behavioral outcomes. The
green triangle shows that scores that maximize impacts on college attendance place
signiﬁcantly more emphasis on test scores. This point is slightly inside the frontier,
however, demonstrating that even if the district sought to increase college attendance
as much as possible they should place at least some weight on behaviors.
In practice, teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes are also not observed and must be
estimated instead. The red dashed-line demonstrates what could be achieved with
the best possible estimates, i.e., that coincide with the truth. The costs of estimating
scores instead will depend on the information the district has available—how many
years teachers are observed, how many students they teach, etc.—and the quality of
the models they use to predict teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes.
To illustrate the potential losses from estimating instead of observing teacher eﬀects
on short-run outcomes, we adopt common Empirical Bayes methods proposed in the
value-added literature (e.g., Kane and Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al., 2014a; Gilraine
et al., 2021). These results are shown in the solid orange line in Figure 5. Naturally,
only a portion of the gains from using true eﬀects on short-run outcomes are achievable
when these eﬀects must be estimated. Using our data, the cost implies reductions in
31

===== PAGE 33 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

arrests or improvements in college attendance that are roughly half as large.
6 Conclusion
Teachers help students develop a variety of skills necessary to be successful, healthy,
and happy adults. The skills needed to excel in one aspect of life, such as the labor
market, may diﬀer from those needed in another, such as avoiding entanglement in
the criminal justice system. Although prior work demonstrates that teachers who
increase students’ cognitive skills captured by standardized tests scores increase their
college attendance and adult earnings, we ﬁnd that teachers’ test score impacts are
orthogonal to students’ criminal justice contact as young adults. One of the most
common and widespread measures of teacher quality is thus irrelevant for an outcome
with life-changing consequences for a large share of the population (Brame et al.,
2014).
Instead, teachers who improve proxies for non-cognitive skills such as rates of school
discipline and attendance have meaningful impacts on students’ future arrest, con-
viction, and incarceration rates. Our results are consistent with a growing number
of studies showing that educational policies and interventions that decrease CJC of-
ten primarily operate through development of these non-cognitive channels (Deming,
2009, 2011; Heckman et al., 2013).
References
Aaronson, D., L. Barrow, and W. Sander (2007). Teachers and student achievement
in the chicago public high schools. Journal of Labor Economics 25 , 95–135.
Abaluck, J., M. Caceres Bravo, P. Hull, and A. Starc (2021). Mortality eﬀects
and choice across private health insurance plans. The quarterly journal of eco-
nomics 136 (3), 1557–1610.
Agostinelli, F. and M. Wiswall (2025). Estimating the technology of children’s skill
formation. Journal of Political Economy 133 (3), 846–887.
Altonji, J., T. Elder, and C. Taber (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved
variables: Assessing the eﬀectiveness of catholic schools. Journal of Political Econ-
omy 113 (1), 151–184.
Angrist, J. D., P. D. Hull, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2017, 02). Leveraging
Lotteries for School Value-Added: Testing and Estimation. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 132 (2), 871–919.
32

===== PAGE 34 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Bacher-Hicks, A., S. B. Billings, and D. J. Deming (2019, September). The school to
prison pipeline: Long-run impacts of school suspensions on adult crime. Working
Paper 26257, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bacher-Hicks, A., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014). Validating teacher eﬀects
estimates using changes in teacher assignments in los angeles. NBER Working
Paper No. 20657.
Bacher-Hicks, A. and C. Koedel (2023). Estimation and interpretation of teacher
value added in research applications. Handbook of the Economics of Education 6 ,
93–134.
Backes, B., J. Cowan, D. Goldhaber, and R. Theobald (2022). Teachers and students’
postsecondary outcomes: Testing the predictive power of test and nontest teacher
quality measures. Technical report, CALDER Working Paper.
Bates, M. D., M. Dinerstein, A. C. Johnston, and I. Sorkin (2022). Teacher labor
market equilibrium and student achievement. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Bau, N. and J. Das (2020). Teacher value added in a low-income country. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12 (1), 62–96.
Bertrand, M. and J. Pan (2013, January). The trouble with boys: Social inﬂuences
and the gender gap in disruptive behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5 (1), 32–64.
Biasi, B., C. Fu, and J. Stromme (2021). Equilibrium in the market for public school
teachers: District wage strategies and teacher comparative advantage. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brame, R., S. D. Bushway, R. Paternoster, and M. G. Turner (2014). Demographic
patterns of cumulative arrest prevalence by ages 18 and 23. Crime and Delin-
quency 60 (3), 471–486.
Chen, J. (2023). Empirical bayes when estimation precision predicts parameters.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoﬀ (2014a). Measuring the impacts of
teachers i: Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. American Economic
Review 104 (9).
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoﬀ (2014b). Measuring the impacts of
teachers ii: Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American
Economic Review 104 (9).
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoﬀ (2016, May). Using lagged outcomes to
evaluate bias in value-added models. American Economic Review 106 (5), 393–99.
33

===== PAGE 35 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoﬀ (2017, June). Measuring the impacts
of teachers: Reply. American Economic Review 107 (6), 1685–1717.
Cohen, M. A. and A. R. Piquero (2009). New evidence on the monetary value of
saving a high risk youth. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 25 , 25–49.
Condie, S., L. Lefgren, and D. Sims (2014). Teacher heterogeneity, value-added and
education policy. Economics of Education Review 40 , 76–92.
Cook, P. J. and S. Kang (2016, January). Birthdays, schooling, and crime: Regression-
discontinuity analysis of school performance, delinquency, dropout, and crime ini-
tiation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1), 33–57.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the
technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of human re-
sources 43 (4), 738–782.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010). Estimating the technology
of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.
Cunha, F., E. Nielsen, and B. Williams (2021). The econometrics of early childhood
human capital and investments. Annual Review of Economics 13 , 487–513.
Dee, T. S. (2005). A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter? The
American Economic Review 95 (2), 158–165.
Delgado, W. (2021). Heterogeneous teacher eﬀects, comparative advantage, and match
quality. Technical report, Working Paper.
Deming, D. J. (2009, July). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill devel-
opment: Evidence from head start. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
nomics 1 (3), 111–34.
Deming, D. J. (2011, 10). Better Schools, Less Crime? The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126 (4), 2063–2115.
Deming, D. J. (2017, 06). The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor
Market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1593–1640.
Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly (2007). Grit:
perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of personality and social
psychology 92, 1087–101.
El Karoui, N. and E. Purdom (2018). Can we trust the bootstrap in high-dimensions?
the case of linear models. Journal of Machine Learning Research 19 (5), 1–66.
Gershenson, S., C. M. Hart, J. Hyman, C. A. Lindsay, and N. W. Papageorge (2022).
The long-run impacts of same-race teachers. American Economic Journal: Eco-
nomic Policy 14 (4), 300–342.
34

===== PAGE 36 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Giacomini, R., S. Lee, and S. Sarpietro (2023). A robust method for microforecasting
and estimation of random eﬀects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01596 .
Gilraine, M., J. Gu, R. McMillan, et al. (2021). A nonparametric method for esti-
mating teacher value-added. Technical report.
Gilraine, M. and N. G. Pope (2021). Making teaching last: Long-run value-added.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gray-Lobe, G., P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2023). The long-term eﬀects of
universal preschool in boston. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 138 (1), 363–
411.
Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev (2013, October). Understanding the mech-
anisms through which an inﬂuential early childhood program boosted adult out-
comes. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2052–86.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Eco-
nomics 19 (4), 451–464.
Heckman, J. J. and Y. Rubinstein (2001, May). The importance of noncognitive skills:
Lessons from the ged testing program. American Economic Review 91 (2), 145–149.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006). The eﬀects of cognitive and noncog-
nitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor
Economics 24 (3), 411–482.
Jackson, C. K. (2014). Teacher quality at the high school level: The importance of
accounting for tracks. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4), 645–684.
Jackson, C. K. (2018). What do test scores miss? the importance of teacher eﬀects
on non–test score outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5), 2072–2107.
Jackson, C. K., S. C. Porter, J. Q. Easton, A. Blanchard, and S. Kiguel (2020).
School eﬀects on socioemotional development, school-based arrests, and educational
attainment. American Economic Review: Insights 2 (4), 491–508.
Jordan, A., E. Karger, and D. Neal (2024). Early predictors of racial disparities
in criminal justice involvement. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008, December). Estimating teacher impacts on
student achievement: An experimental evaluation. Working Paper 14607, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Sølvsten (2020). Leave-out estimation of variance com-
ponents. Econometrica 88 (5), 1859–1898.
35

===== PAGE 37 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Kline, P. M., E. K. Rose, and C. R. Walters (2021). Systemic discrimination among
large u.s. employers. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krueger, A. B. and L. H. Summers (1988). Eﬃciency wages and the inter-industry
wage structure. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 259–293.
Kwon, S. (2023). Optimal shrinkage estimation of ﬁxed eﬀects in linear panel data
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12485 .
Lindqvist, E. and R. Vestman (2011, January). The labor market returns to cog-
nitive and noncognitive ability: Evidence from the swedish enlistment. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1), 101–28.
Lleras, C. (2008). Do skills and behaviors in high school matter? the contribution of
noncognitive factors in explaining diﬀerences in educational attainment and earn-
ings. Social Science Research 37 (3), 888–902.
Mulhern, C. and I. Opper (2022). Measuring and summarizing the multiple dimensions
of teacher eﬀectiveness.
Neal, D. (2011). The design of performance pay in education. In Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 4, pp. 495–550.
Papp, J. and M. Mueller-Smith (2021). Benchmarking the criminal justice administra-
tive records system’s data infrastructure. Working paper, University of Michigan.
Petek, N. and N. Pope (2021). The multidimensional impact of teachers on students.
Technical report, Working Paper.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, and S.-R. Ou (2010). Preschool education, educational
attainment, and crime prevention: Contributions of cognitive and non-cognitive
skills. Children and Youth Services Review 32 (8), 1054–1063.
Rivkin, S. G., E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic
achievement. Econometrica 73 (2), 417–458.
Rothstein, J. (2010). Teacher quality in educational production: Tracking, decay, and
student achievement. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1), 175–214.
Rothstein, J. (2017). Measuring the impacts of teachers: Comment. American Eco-
nomic Review 107 (6), 1656–84.
Schennach, S. M. (2016). Recent advances in the measurement error literature.Annual
review of economics 8 (1), 341–377.
Sorensen, L. C., S. D. Bushway, and E. J. Giﬀord (2019). Getting tough? the eﬀects
of discretionary principal discipline on student outcomes. Education Finance and
Policy, 1–74.
36

===== PAGE 38 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure 1: Eﬀects of teacher quality on long-run outcomes
a) CJC outcomes b) Academic outcomes
T est scores Behaviors Study skills
Short-run outcome
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
Effect of 1 SD increase on long-run outcomes
-0.2%
-1.6%
-0.2%
-0.1%
-2.3%
 0.4%
-0.4%
-4.4%
 0.2%
-0.7%
-3.0%
-2.0%
Any CJC
Criminal arrest
Index crime
Incarceration
T est scores Behaviors Study skills
Short-run outcome
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175Effect of 1 SD increase on long-run outcomes
 0.4%
 0.5%
 0.0% 0.2%
 0.5%
 0.1%
 1.3%
 0.8%  0.7%
12th grade GPA
Graduation
College attendance
Notes: This ﬁgure presents the estimated eﬀect of a 1 standard deviation in teacher quality as measured by short-run outcomes
(x-axis) on long-run outcomes implied by estimates of the variance-covariance of teacher eﬀects. The error bars are 95% conﬁdence
intervals based on analytic standard errors estimated using the procedure described in Appendix C. Numbers above/below each bar
report eﬀects as a percentage of the outcome mean. Test scores refers to the combined outcome of the ﬁrst principal component
of math and reading scores for homeroom teachers, math scores for math teachers, and reading scores for reading teachers,
respectively. Behaviors refers to the ﬁrst principal component of an indicator for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent in
yeart + 1, and an indicator for grade repetition, all standardized within year and grade. Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal
component of standardized within year and grade reported time spent on homework, watching TV, and reading. Criminal arrest
refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal
violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an
indicator for students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full set of
covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for each outcome.
37

===== PAGE 39 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure 2: Assessing omitted variable bias in teacher eﬀect estimates
Predicted short-run outcomes
a) Test scores b) Behaviors
-.03-.02-.010.01.02.03Omitted variables fit-.4-.20.2.4Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0003 (.0002)
-.03-.02-.010.01.02.03Omitted variables fit-.4-.20.2.4Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0028 (.0005)
Predicted long-run outcomes
c) Criminal arrest d) Incarceration
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.1-.050.05.1Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0013 (.001)
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.1-.050.05.1Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0045 (.0012)
Notes: This ﬁgure presents a diagnostic test for whether the estimated teacher eﬀects (ˆαit =∑
j ˆαjDijt from Equation 2) are correlated with variables ( W′
it ˆρ from Equation 9) that
predict short- and long-run outcomes but were omitted when estimating the teacher eﬀects.
The ﬂat slopes demonstrates that teacher eﬀect estimates are insensitive to the inclusion
of these omitted variables. Following Chetty et al. (2014a) we include parental education
and twice lagged test scores among the omitted variables. We also include twins indicators
as omitted variables, with all non-twins assigned to a separate indicator. Results change
little when regressing W′
it ˆρ on ˆαit in the sample of twins only. Teacher eﬀect estimators
include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for each
outcome.
38

===== PAGE 40 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure 3: Correlation in teacher eﬀects across groups
a) Short-run outcomes
T est scores Study skills Behaviors
Short-run outcome
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Correlation in short-run effects across groups
Race (white vs. non-white)
Gender
Econ disadv
High/low arrest risk
b) Criminal justice contact c) Academic outcomes
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration
Long-run outcome
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Correlation in long-run effects across groups
Race (white vs. non-white)
Gender
Econ disadv
High/low arrest risk
Graduation 12th grade GPA College attendance
Long-run outcome
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Correlation in long-run effects across groups
Race (white vs. non-white)
Gender
Econ disadv
High/low arrest risk
Notes: This ﬁgure presents the estimated correlation in teacher eﬀects on short-run out-
comes (panel a) and long-run outcomes (panels b and c) across groups of students. The
error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals based on analytic standard errors estimated using
the procedure described in Appendix C. Test scores refers to the combined outcome of the
ﬁrst principal component of math and reading scores for homeroom teachers, math scores
for math teachers, and reading scores for reading teachers, respectively. Behaviors refers to
the ﬁrst principal component of an indicator for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent
in year t + 1, and an indicator for grade repetition, all standardized within year and grade.
Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal component of standardized within year and grade
reported time spent on homework, watching TV, and reading. Criminal arrest refers to any
criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc
tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the stu-
dent’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for students’ plans
to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the
full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for each outcome.
39

===== PAGE 41 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure 4: Heterogeneous impacts of exposure to teachers who improve behaviors
a) Criminal arrest
Non-white
White Female
Male
Not disadv
Disadv Low riskHigh risk
Demographic group
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Effect of 1 sd increase in
teacher effects on arrests
-0.5%
-4.1%
-4.1%
-2.0%
-3.3%
-2.9%
-2.2%
-2.9%
b) Incarceration
Non-white
White Female
Male
Not disadv
Disadv Low riskHigh risk
Demographic group
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Effect of 1 sd increase in
teacher effects on incarceration
-2.9% -4.9%
-10.9%
-3.5% -10.0% -3.7%
-9.9%
-3.6%
Notes: This ﬁgure presents the estimated eﬀect of a one standard deviation in teacher qual-
ity as measured by impacts on students’ behaviors on long-run outcomes across groups of
students. The error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals based on analytic standard errors
estimated using the procedure described in Appendix C. Test scores refers to the combined
outcome of the ﬁrst principal component of math and reading scores for homeroom teach-
ers, math scores for math teachers, and reading scores for reading teachers, respectively.
Behaviors refers to the ﬁrst principal component of an indicator for any discipline in t + 1,
total days absent in yeart+1, and an indicator for grade repetition, all standardized within
year and grade. Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal component of standardized within
year and grade reported time spent on homework, watching TV, and reading. Criminal ar-
rest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16 and 21 (i.e.,
excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale
GPA for the student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for
students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. Teacher eﬀect estima-
tors include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for
each outcome.
40

===== PAGE 42 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure 5: Eﬀects of teacher removal policies on exposed students
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
Increase in college attendance 
 in exposed classrooms
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Reduction in future criminal arrest 
 in exposed classrooms
Only study skills
Only behavioral
Only test scores
True effects on arrest and college
True effects on short-run outcomes
EB posteriors of effects on short-run outcomes
Markers indicate putting full weight
on effects on a single short-run outcome
Notes: This ﬁgure presents simulations of the impacts of replacing the bottom ﬁve percent
of teachers with an average teacher on college attendance and future criminal arrests. The
rightmost dotted maroon lines in reﬂect the frontiers achievable if teachers’ true long-run
eﬀects were directly observed and used to identify which teachers to replace. The dashed
red line reﬂects possibilities if teachers true short-run eﬀects on test scores, behaviors, and
study skills were observed and used to select teachers. The leftmost solid line shows possi-
bilities using EB estimates of teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes instead. The markers
indicate gains when putting full weight on a single short-run outcome to select teachers for
replacement, with solid markers using true eﬀects and hollow markers using EB posteriors.
Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all
available years for each outcome. All simulations assume teacher eﬀects are jointly normally
distributed.
41

===== PAGE 43 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table 1: Summary statistics
Full sample Sample for which Youth with a
we observe CJC criminal arrest
Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Demographics
Male 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.64 0.48
Black 0.25 0.43 0.27 0.44 0.37 0.48
Economically disadvantaged 0.58 0.49 0.61 0.49 0.73 0.44
Limited English 0.043 0.20 0.055 0.23 0.036 0.19
Parents have HS education or less 0.40 0.49 0.43 0.49 0.53 0.50
Parents have some college 0.45 0.50 0.48 0.50 0.37 0.48
Parents have 4-year degree 0.22 0.41 0.24 0.43 0.15 0.36
Short-run outcomes
Standardized reading scores 0.046 0.97 0.054 0.96 -0.23 0.94
Standardized math scores 0.061 0.97 0.066 0.97 -0.21 0.92
Days absent 9.11 9.20 9.08 9.44 10.9 11.1
Any discipline 0.17 0.37 0.17 0.38 0.31 0.46
Any out-of-school suspension 0.080 0.27 0.095 0.29 0.20 0.40
Repeat grade 0.0088 0.093 0.0087 0.093 0.015 0.12
Behavioral index 0 1.10 -0.025 1.12 0.44 1.37
Time spent on homework 0.023 0.99 0.023 0.99 -0.081 1.01
Time spent reading 0.0052 0.99 0.0041 0.99 -0.14 0.96
Time spent watching TV -0.0052 0.98 -0.0078 0.98 0.085 1.02
Study skills index 0 1.09 0.0054 1.09 -0.17 1.09
Long-run outcomes
12th grade GPA (0-6 scale) 3.13 0.95 3.12 0.95 2.64 0.87
12th grade class rank 0.48 0.29 0.48 0.28 0.61 0.26
Graduate high school 0.91 0.28 0.92 0.28 0.81 0.40
Plans to attend 4-year college 0.46 0.50 0.46 0.50 0.33 0.47
Traﬃc infraction 0.33 0.47 0.33 0.47 0.63 0.48
Criminal arrest 0.24 0.43 0.24 0.43 1 0
Index crime arrest 0.10 0.31 0.10 0.31 0.44 0.50
Criminal conviction 0.10 0.30 0.10 0.30 0.43 0.49
Incarcerated 0.089 0.29 0.089 0.29 0.36 0.48
N student-subject-years 9779708 4159500 984349
N teachers 39707 27236 27202
N students 1953547 755457 179484
N twin pairs 18213 12516 4149
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for demographic characteristics, short-run
outcomes, and long-run outcomes for the analysis sample, the sample of students for which
we observe CJC outcomes, and a sub-sample of students with a criminal arrest between ages
16 to 21. Not all outcomes are observed in all years; summary statistics reﬂect means and
standard deviations for non-missing data only. In each analysis, we use the largest sample
possible given when an outcome is observed. See Section 1 for additional details on data
construction and outcome coverage by year. Note that the sample of youth with an arrest
drops individuals for whom CJC outcomes are unobserved.42

===== PAGE 44 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table 2: Direct eﬀects on long-run outcomes
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA College attendance Graduation
Any CJC 0.035 (0.0007) 0.779 (0.018) 0.513 (0.029) 0.479 (0.025) -0.055 (0.016) -0.103 (0.026) -0.162 (0.025)
Criminal arrest 0.027 (0.0007) 0.816 (0.021) 0.583 (0.023) -0.150 (0.018) -0.153 (0.028) -0.262 (0.029)
Index crime 0.018 (0.0006) 0.507 (0.031) -0.126 (0.020) -0.064 (0.032) -0.352 (0.036)
Incarceration 0.021 (0.0005) -0.101 (0.016) -0.175 (0.027) -0.281 (0.029)
12th grade GPA 0.116 (0.0025) 0.394 (0.032) 0.312 (0.029)
College attendance 0.050 (0.0024) 0.256 (0.041)
Graduation 0.023 (0.0013)
Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations (diagonal elements) and correlations (oﬀ-diagonal elements) of teacher
eﬀects on long-run outcomes. Analytic standard errors displayed in parentheses are estimated using the procedure described in
Appendix C. Any CJC refers to any interaction recorded in the criminal justice records between the ages of 16 and 21 inclusive.
Criminal arrest excludes non-criminal interactions (e.g., traﬃc infractions). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the
student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for students’ reported plans to attend a four-year
college reported after graduation. Graduation is an indicator for graduating high school. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the
full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and using all available years for each outcome.
Table 3: Teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes
Test scores Math scores Reading scores Study skills Behaviors
Test scores 0.121 (0.0006) 0.909 (0.0020) 0.810 (0.0035) 0.317 (0.0071) 0.056 (0.0089)
Math scores 0.134 (0.0005) 0.675 (0.0057) 0.279 (0.0067) 0.047 (0.0089)
Reading scores 0.073 (0.0006) 0.337 (0.0090) 0.071 (0.0109)
Study skills 0.183 (0.0018) 0.033 (0.0085)
Behaviors 0.125 (0.0017)
Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations (diagonal elements) and correlations (oﬀ-diagonal elements) of teacher
eﬀects on short-run outcomes. Analytic standard errors displayed in parentheses are estimated using the procedure described in
Appendix C. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and using all available years for
each outcome.
43

===== PAGE 45 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table 4: Implied regression of long-run eﬀects on short-run eﬀects
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA Graduation College attendance
Test scores -0.001 (0.004) -0.003 (0.003) -0.003 (0.002) 0.000 (0.002) 0.097 (0.010) 0.010 (0.003) 0.045 (0.007)
Behaviors -0.059 (0.005) -0.048 (0.004) -0.038 (0.003) -0.023 (0.003) 0.124 (0.013) 0.039 (0.004) 0.029 (0.008)
Study skills -0.004 (0.003) 0.007 (0.002) 0.002 (0.002) -0.009 (0.002) -0.014 (0.008) 0.001 (0.002) 0.009 (0.006)
sd(µy
j) 0.035 (0.001) 0.027 (0.001) 0.018 (0.001) 0.021 (0.001) 0.116 (0.003) 0.023 (0.001) 0.050 (0.002)
R2 0.039 0.042 0.059 0.023 0.025 0.041 0.020
Notes: This table presents the coeﬃcients from a regression of long-run outcomes on short-run teacher eﬀects implied by variance-
covariance matrix of short- and long-run teachers eﬀects. Analytic standard errors displayed in parentheses are estimated using
the procedure described in Appendix C. The ﬁnal two rows report estimated standard deviations of teacher eﬀects on the long-run
outcome and the R2 from the regression. See also the notes of Table 3.
44

===== PAGE 46 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table 5: Instrumental variables tests for forecast unbiased teacher eﬀects
(a) Short-run outcomes
Test scores Behaviors Study skills
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl
ˆαj 1.002 1.052 0.938 0.984 1.043 1.087
(0.0120) (0.0157) (0.0678) (0.117) (0.0353) (0.0595)
Observations 9779708 9779708 5422682 5422682 3404657 3404657
R2 0.753 0.752 0.247 0.244 0.180 0.176
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
First stage F 51914 32164 3349 1205 6865 2557
P -value for H0 :λ = 1 .873 .001 .363 .891 .229 .145
(b) Long-run outcomes
Criminal arrest Incarceration College bound
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl
ˆαj 1.090 1.190 1.156 1.246 0.983 0.807
(0.0824) (0.311) (0.0890) (0.319) (0.0535) (0.167)
Observations 4159500 4159500 4159500 4159500 3205422 3205422
R2 0.0916 0.0899 0.0836 0.0816 0.282 0.279
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
First stage F 4825 386 4032 397 4399 651
P -value for H0 :λ = 1 .276 .543 .079 .44 .745 .248
Notes: This table presents instrumental variable tests for bias in estimated teacher eﬀects on
short- and long-run outcomes, where an estimate of 1 implies forecast unbiased estimates.
Design controls include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and using all
available years for each outcome. The reported coeﬃcient on ˆ αit is estimated via 2SLS
using a teacher switching instrument deﬁned at the school-grade (odd columns) or school-
level (even columns). The instrument is the product of an indicator for new teacher entry
into student i’s school-grade or school at time t times the mean of ˆ αj for all entering
teachers estimated in all other school-grades or schools. Only entries where at least one
new teacher’s eﬀects are estimable in other schools or school grades are included in the
instrument. Means are weighted by number of students assigned at time t. All regressions
include an indicator for any teacher entry. Standard errors clustered at the student level
are reported in parentheses.
45

===== PAGE 47 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

A Additional ﬁgures and tables
Figure A.1: Teacher test score eﬀects in the literature
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35
SD of math effects
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175SD of reading effects
this paper
CFR 2014 (elem)
CFR 2014 (mid)
Jackson 2018 (9th g)
Bacher-Hicks e.a. 2014 (elem)
Bacher-Hicks e.a. 2014 (mid)
Kane Staiger 2008 (elem)
Rothstein 2010 (5th g)
Rothstein 2010 (4th g)
Notes: This ﬁgure compares estimated standard deviation of teacher eﬀects on math and
reading scores to comparable estimates in the literature. “Mid” indicates estimates for
middle school students and “elem” indicates elementary school students. Our estimates
straddle those from studies that focus on elementary students vs. those that focus on older
students (e.g., Jackson (2018)).
1

===== PAGE 48 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure A.2: Eﬀects of “long-run” teacher quality on outcomes
a) CJC outcomes b) Academic outcomes
T est scores Behaviors Study skills
Short-run outcome
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
Effect of 1 SD increase on long-run outcomes
-0.4%
-1.6%
-0.7%
-0.6%
-2.3%
-0.2%
-1.3%
-4.4%
-1.1%
-0.8%
-3.0%
-2.2%
Any CJC
Criminal arrest
Index crime
Incarceration
T est scores Behaviors Study skills
Short-run outcome
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Effect of 1 SD increase on long-run outcomes
 0.7%
 0.5%
 0.2%
 0.2%
 0.5%
 0.0%
 1.6%
 0.8%
-0.3%
12th grade GPA
Graduation
College attendance
Notes: This ﬁgure presents the estimated eﬀect of a 1 standard deviation in teacher quality as measured by short-run outcomes
(x-axis) on long-run outcomes implied by estimates of the variance-covariance of teacher eﬀects. Unlike in Figure 1, teachers
eﬀects on test scores and study skills are measured using outcomes in t + 1 to capture their “long-run” impacts (Gilraine and
Pope, 2021). Behavioral outcomes were already measured at t + 1 in our primary analysis, but their eﬀects are repeated here
for comparison. The error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals based on analytic standard errors estimated using the procedure
described in Appendix C. Numbers above/below each bar report eﬀects as a percentage of the outcome mean. Test scores refers to
the combined outcome of the ﬁrst principal component of math and reading scores for homeroom teachers, math scores for math
teachers, and reading scores for reading teachers, respectively. Behaviors refers to the ﬁrst principal component of an indicator
for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent in year t + 1, and an indicator for grade repetition, all standardized within year
and grade. Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal component of standardized within year and grade reported time spent on
homework, watching TV, and reading. Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages
16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the student’s
ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in
12th grade. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for each
outcome.
2

===== PAGE 49 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure A.3: Assessing omitted variable bias in additional long-run outcomes
Predicted long-run CJC outcomes
a) Any CJC b) Arrest for index crime
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.2-.10.1.2Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0008 (.001)
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.1-.050.05.1Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0017 (.0011)
Predicted long-run academic outcomes
c) College bound d) 12th grade GPA
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.2-.10.1.2Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0132 (.001)
-.025-.02-.015-.01-.0050.005.01.015.02.025Omitted variables fit-.4-.20.2.4Estimated teacher effectSlope: .0071 (.0008)
Notes: This ﬁgure presents a diagnostic test for whether the estimated teacher eﬀects (ˆαit =∑
j ˆαjDijt from Equation 2) are correlated with predictions based on omitted variables (W′
it ˆρ
from Equation 9) that are predictable of the short- and long-run outcomes but have not
been used when estimating the teacher eﬀects. Following Chetty et al. (2014a) we include
parental education and twice lagged test scores among the omitted variables. We also include
twins indicators as omitted variables, with all non-twins assigned to a separate indicator.
Results change little when regressing W′
it ˆρ on ˆαit in the sample of twins only. Teacher eﬀect
estimators include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available
years for each outcome.
3

===== PAGE 50 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure A.4: Speciﬁcation sensitivity of teacher quality impacts on arrests
a) Test scores
5 10 15 20 25
# of controls included in model
0.0150
0.0125
0.0100
0.0075
0.0050
0.0025
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
Impact of 1 SD increase in
test score effects on arrests
Preferred estimate
Min Max Median effect
b) Behaviors
5 10 15 20 25
# of controls included in model
0.0150
0.0125
0.0100
0.0075
0.0050
0.0025
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
Impact of 1 SD increase in
behavioral effects on arrests
Preferred estimate
Min Max Median effect
Notes: This ﬁgures shows the speciﬁcation sensitivity of estimated eﬀects of one standard
deviation increase in teacher quality on future criminal arrests. We estimate the variance-
covariance of teacher eﬀects from 811 diﬀerent models that vary the number of included
controls. All models include lag third-degree polynomials in math and reading scores inter-
acted with grade, and year-grade-subject FEs. The x-axis shows the quantity of other con-
trols included from among school, school-grade-year, or school-grade-classroom-year means
of other included covariates, lag absences and discipline, educational and behavioral special
needs, and academically gifted indicators, limited English proﬁciency status, gender and
race, parental education, grade repetition, and twice-lagged scores. The graph reports the
min, median, and max eﬀect estimate among models with the same number of controls.
4

===== PAGE 51 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure A.5: Heterogeneous impacts of exposure to teachers who improve test scores
a) Criminal arrest
Non-white
White Female
Male
Not disadv
Disadv Low riskHigh risk
Demographic group
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Effect of 1 sd increase in
teacher effects on arrests
-0.4%
-1.2%
-0.4%
 0.2%
-0.8% -0.3%
 0.4%  0.2%
b) Incarceration
Non-white
White Female
Male
Not disadv
Disadv Low riskHigh risk
Demographic group
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Effect of 1 sd increase in
teacher effects on incarceration
 0.1%
-3.3%
-0.0%
-0.7% -1.8% -0.6% -2.1%
-0.0%
Notes: This ﬁgure presents the estimated eﬀect of a one standard deviation in teacher quality
as measured by impacts on students’ test scores on long-run outcomes across groups of students.
The error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals based on analytic standard errors estimated using the
procedure described in Appendix C. Test scores refers to the combined outcome of the ﬁrst principal
component of math and reading scores for homeroom teachers, math scores for math teachers, and
reading scores for reading teachers, respectively. Behaviors refers to the ﬁrst principal component of
an indicator for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent in year t + 1, and an indicator for grade
repetition, all standardized within year and grade. Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal component
of standardized within year and grade reported time spent on homework, watching TV, and reading.
Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16 and 21
(i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA
for the student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for students’
plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full
set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and use all available years for each outcome.
5

===== PAGE 52 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.1: Predictors of teacher eﬀects
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Test scores Study skills Behaviors Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration
Female 0.0251 ∗∗∗ 0.0632∗∗∗ 0.00684 -0.00348 ∗∗∗ -0.00170∗ -0.00195∗∗
(0.00233) (0.00447) (0.00364) (0.00102) (0.000735) (0.000752)
Non-white -0.0126 ∗∗∗ -0.0271∗∗∗ -0.00561 -0.00116 -0.000332 -0.00506 ∗∗∗
(0.00247) (0.00502) (0.00407) (0.00116) (0.000869) (0.000866)
Age 0.000171 ∗ 0.00128∗∗∗ -0.000351∗∗ 0.0000268 -0.0000210 0.0000287
(0.0000784) (0.000169) (0.000125) (0.0000351) (0.0000251) (0.0000254)
Prior experience 0.00318 ∗∗∗ 0.00335∗∗∗ 0.000900∗ 0.0000238 0.00000751 0.000119
(0.000223) (0.000745) (0.000367) (0.000123) (0.0000876) (0.0000865)
Masters or higher 0.00362 ∗ 0.0130∗∗ 0.00115 -0.00115 0.0000686 0.000516
(0.00171) (0.00404) (0.00261) (0.000778) (0.000552) (0.000561)
Average test score 0.00696 ∗∗∗ 0.0153∗∗∗ -0.00362∗ 0.000544 0.000327 -0.000383
(0.00105) (0.00224) (0.00168) (0.000465) (0.000327) (0.000338)
Pay (standardized) 0.00807 ∗∗∗ 0.00781∗∗∗ -0.00424∗∗ 0.000688 0.000339 -0.00134 ∗∗∗
(0.000802) (0.00163) (0.00149) (0.000391) (0.000303) (0.000301)
Constant -0.0393 ∗∗∗ -0.130∗∗∗ 0.00470 0.00289 0.00284 ∗ 0.000940
(0.00356) (0.00726) (0.00567) (0.00160) (0.00114) (0.00114)
N teacher-years 196344 89947 87684 82228 82228 82228
N teachers 35044 24604 24695 24232 24232 24232
Notes: This table presents demographic and professional predictors of teacher eﬀects on
multiple outcomes. Each column is a single regression of ¯Yk
jt, where k is the outcome listed
in the column header, on several teacher characteristics for all teacher-years in which both
the outcome and the teacher characteristic are available. Age and prior experience are
measured in years. Average test score is the teacher-year average of standardized (within
test-type and year) scores on Praxis licensing exams. Pay is gross total pay standardized to
have mean zero and standard deviation one within each year.
6

===== PAGE 53 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.2: Regression based estimates of teacher test score eﬀects on long-run outcomes
CJC outcomes Academic outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA Graduation College bound
Test score VA -0.0108 -0.00795 -0.00591 -0.00553 0.0781 0.0104 0.0368
(0.00398) (0.00332) (0.00228) (0.00232) (0.00907) (0.00220) (0.00478)
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
1SD eﬀect -.0012 -.0008 -.0006 -.0006 .0083 .0011 .0039
R2 0.0480 0.0754 0.0596 0.0663 0.542 0.106 0.253
Observations 4159500 4159500 4159500 4159500 3429388 4623602 3205422
Notes: This table presents regressions of teacher test score value added calculated using the method in Chetty et al. (2014a) on long-run
outcomes. Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and
non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College attendance is an
indicator for students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. This method allows for drift in teacher eﬀects and accounts
for measurement error by forming the best linear predictor of teacher eﬀects in year t based on their impacts in all other years. The ﬁnal
row of the table presents the regression coeﬃcient implied by our procedure. Standard errors clustered at the student level are reported in
parentheses.
Table A.3: Regression based estimates of teacher behavioral eﬀects on long-run outcomes
CJC outcomes Academic outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA Graduation College bound
Behavioral index VA -0.0517 -0.0453 -0.0354 -0.0233 0.179 0.0259 0.0361
(0.00639) (0.00541) (0.00376) (0.00365) (0.0130) (0.00346) (0.00753)
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
1SD eﬀect -.0042 -.0036 -.0028 -.0019 .0142 .002 .0029
R2 0.0481 0.0751 0.0596 0.0651 0.543 0.106 0.256
Observations 3700227 3700227 3700227 3700227 2969019 4001899 2850488
Notes: See the notes of Table A.2.
7

===== PAGE 54 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.4: Omitted variables bias tests for short-run teacher eﬀects
Test scores Behavioral index Study skills index
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Y ˆY Y ˆY Y ˆY
No high school -0.0491 -0.102 -0.0533
(0.000932) (0.00268) (0.00255)
High school only -0.0329 -0.0768 -0.0239
(0.000780) (0.00187) (0.00239)
Some college 0.0157 0.0476 0.0439
(0.000811) (0.00204) (0.00244)
BA or more 0.0260 0.0327 0.0668
(0.000643) (0.00191) (0.00170)
Lag 2 math 0.114 0.0311 0.00129
(0.000401) (0.000974) (0.00137)
Lag 2 reading 0.126 0.0144 0.0582
(0.000384) (0.000928) (0.00129)
Teacher eﬀect 0.000309 0.00277 0.00202
(0.000187) (0.000452) (0.000490)
Observations 9757562 9757562 5415717 5415717 3387386 3387386
R2 0.761 0.770 0.252 0.872 0.189 0.584
Original R2 .7497 .2408 .1723
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Twin FE ✓ ✓ ✓
Notes: This table presents tests for omitted variable bias in estimated teacher eﬀects on
short-run outcomes. Test scores refers to the combined outcome of the ﬁrst principal com-
ponent of math and reading scores for homeroom teachers, math scores for math teachers,
and reading scores for reading teachers, respectively. Behaviors refers to the ﬁrst principal
component of an indicator for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent in yeart + 1, and an
indicator for grade repetition, all standardized within year and grade. Study skills refers to
the ﬁrst principal component of standardized within year and grade reported time spent on
homework, watching TV, and reading. The odd columns regress the outcome listed in the
sub-header on the excluded covariates, teacher dummies, and the full set of design controls
described in Section 2.1. The even columns regress predicted outcomes based on the ex-
cluded covariates on estimated teacher eﬀects ˆαit = ∑
j ˆαjDijt. Education variables refer to
students’ reported parental education, with an indicator for missing parental education data
serving as the omitted category. Lag 2 math and reading refer to twice-lagged standardized
test scores, with indicators for missing twice-lag scores included but not reported. Twin-
eﬀects include ﬁxed eﬀects for all twin pairs and an indicator for non-twin interacted with
year. Results change little when regressing ˆYit on ˆαit in the sample of twins only. Original
R2 refers to the R2 of the regression without excluded covariates used to estimate teacher
eﬀects. Standard errors clustered at the student level are reported in parentheses.
8

===== PAGE 55 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.5: Omitted variables bias tests for long-run teacher eﬀects on outcomes
related to criminal justice involvement
Any arrest Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Y ˆY Y ˆY Y ˆY Y ˆY
No high school 0.00300 0.0177 0.0198 0.0270
(0.00113) (0.000954) (0.000694) (0.000642)
High school only -0.0000113 0.0184 0.0147 0.0173
(0.000866) (0.000730) (0.000531) (0.000492)
Some college -0.00307 -0.0170 -0.0150 -0.0175
(0.000913) (0.000770) (0.000560) (0.000518)
BA or more -0.0196 -0.0178 -0.00873 -0.00615
(0.000781) (0.000658) (0.000479) (0.000443)
Lag 2 math 0.0107 0.00268 -0.000369 0.000680
(0.000562) (0.000474) (0.000345) (0.000319)
Lag 2 reading -0.00953 -0.00776 -0.00544 -0.00499
(0.000526) (0.000443) (0.000322) (0.000298)
Teacher eﬀect 0.000794 0.00128 0.00169 0.00452
(0.00101) (0.00103) (0.00115) (0.00119)
Observations 4145532 4145532 4145532 4145532 4145532 4145532 4145532 4145532
R2 0.0811 0.718 0.107 0.702 0.0914 0.790 0.101 0.737
Original R2 .062 .0888 .0726 .0807
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Twin FE ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Notes: This table presents tests for omitted variable bias in estimated teacher eﬀects on
long-run outcomes. Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system
between ages 16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th
grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the student’s ﬁrst appearance in 12th grade. College
attendance is an indicator for students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th
grade. The odd columns regress the outcome listed in the sub-header on the excluded
covariates, teacher dummies, and the full set of design controls described in Section 2.1.
The even columns regress predicted outcomes based on the excluded covariates on estimated
teacher eﬀects ˆαit = ∑
j ˆαjDijt. Education variables refer to students’ reported parental
education, with an indicator for missing parental education data serving as the omitted
category. Lag 2 math and reading refer to twice-lagged standardized test scores, with
indicators for missing twice-lag scores included but not reported. Twin-eﬀects include ﬁxed
eﬀects for all twin pairs and an indicator for non-twin interacted with year. Results change
little when regressing ˆYit on ˆαit in the sample of twins only. Original R2 refers to the R2 of
the regression without excluded covariates used to estimate teacher eﬀects. Standard errors
clustered at the student level are reported in parentheses.
9

===== PAGE 56 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.6: Instrumental variables bias tests for short-run teacher eﬀects
Test scores Behaviors Study skills
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl Schl-grd Schl
ˆαj 1.002 1.052 1.255 1.681 1.083 1.126
(0.0135) (0.0175) (0.270) (1.101) (0.0641) (0.0825)
Observations 9779708 9779708 5422682 5422682 3404657 3404657
R2 0.723 0.721 0.209 0.200 0.135 0.132
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
School-grade FE ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
First stage F 47960 30550 364 24 2691 1709
P -value for H0 :λ = 1 .875 .003 .346 .536 .198 .127
Notes: This table presents instrumental variable tests for bias in estimated teacher eﬀects on short-
run outcomes. Design controls include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and using all
available years for each outcome. The reported coeﬃcient on ˆαit is estimated via 2SLS using a teacher
switching instrument deﬁned at the school-grade (odd columns) or school-level (even columns). The
instrument is the product of an indicator for new teacher entry into studenti’s school-grade or school
at timet times the mean of ˆαj for all entering teachers estimated in all other school-grades or schools.
Only entries where at least one new teacher’s eﬀects are estimable in other schools or school grades
are included in the instrument. Means are weighted by number of students assigned at time t. All
regressions include an indicator for any teacher entry. Standard errors clustered at the student level
are reported in parentheses.
Table A.7: Instrumental variables bias tests for teacher-eﬀects on criminal arrest
Outcome: Y Outcome: ˆYexcluded
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
ˆαj 1.090 1.456 1.390
(0.0824) (0.386) (0.374)
Zit 0.000191 0.000724 0.00171
(0.000792) (0.000797) (0.000816)
Observations 4159500 4159500 4159500 9779708 9779708 9779708
R2 0.0916 0.0754 0.0742 0.668 0.673 0.682
Design controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
School-grade FE ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Dist-grade-year FE ✓ ✓
First stage F 4825 1101 1207
P -value for H0 :λ = 1 .276 .238 .297
Notes: This table presents instrumental variable tests for bias in estimated teacher eﬀects on future
criminal arrests. Columns 4-6 regress the instrument on predicted outcomes using parental education
and twice-lagged test scores. All regressions include an indicator for any teacher entry. See also the
notes to Table A.6.
10

===== PAGE 57 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.8: Implied regression of long-run eﬀects on short-run eﬀects using only teachers who move across schools
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA Graduation College attendance
Test scores 0.009 (0.009) -0.011 (0.007) -0.002 (0.005) 0.006 (0.005) -0.054 (0.028) -0.005 (0.007) 0.025 (0.017)
Behaviors -0.051 (0.029) -0.033 (0.025) -0.043 (0.021) -0.024 (0.018) 0.277 (0.093) 0.000 (0.020) 0.103 (0.046)
Study skills -0.014 (0.008) 0.021 (0.007) 0.000 (0.005) -0.018 (0.005) 0.089 (0.024) 0.027 (0.007) 0.035 (0.016)
sd(µy
j) 0.023 (0.003) 0.019 (0.003) 0.009 (0.004) 0.014 (0.002) 0.072 (0.009) 0.012 (0.007) 0.033 (0.009)
R2 0.026 0.045 0.108 0.038 0.084 0.095 0.077
Notes: This table presents the coeﬃcients from a regression of long-run outcomes on short-run teacher eﬀects implied by variance-covariance
matrix of short- and long-run teachers eﬀects. The estimates are based variance-covariance estimated from leaving-one-out teacher-school
pairs rather than the leave-one-out teacher-year estimates reported in Table 4. Analytic standard errors displayed in parentheses are estimated
using the procedure described in Appendix C. Test scores refers to the combined outcome of the ﬁrst principal component of math and reading
scores for homeroom teachers, math scores for math teachers, and reading scores for reading teachers, respectively. Behaviors refers to the
ﬁrst principal component of an indicator for any discipline in t + 1, total days absent in year t + 1, and an indicator for grade repetition, all
standardized within year and grade. Study skills refers to the ﬁrst principal component of standardized within year and grade reported time
spent on homework, watching TV, and reading. Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with the justice system between ages 16
and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). 12th grade GPA is a six-point-scale GPA for the student’s ﬁrst appearance
in 12th grade. College attendance is an indicator for students’ plans to attend a four-year college reported in 12th grade. The ﬁnal two rows
report estimate standard deviations of teacher eﬀects on the long-run outcome and the R2 from the regression. Teacher eﬀect estimators
include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and using all available years for each outcome.
Table A.9: Implied regressions using within-school variation
Any CJC Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration 12th grade GPA Graduation College attendance
Test scores -0.007 (0.006) -0.006 (0.006) -0.007 (0.004) -0.003 (0.004) 0.089 (0.016) 0.009 (0.005) 0.046 (0.012)
Behaviors -0.069 (0.030) -0.048 (0.027) -0.026 (0.020) -0.018 (0.017) 0.011 (0.068) 0.018 (0.019) 0.009 (0.046)
Study skills 0.001 (0.007) 0.006 (0.007) 0.002 (0.005) -0.005 (0.005) 0.013 (0.020) -0.004 (0.006) -0.001 (0.014)
sd(αy
j) 0.007 (0.000) 0.003 (0.000) 0.005 (0.000) 0.006 (0.000) 0.050 (0.001) 0.012 (0.000) 0.010 (0.000)
R2 0.306 0.646 0.104 0.056 0.049 0.014 0.276
Notes: This table presents the coeﬃcients from a regression of long-run outcomes on short-run teacher eﬀects implied by the variance-
covariance matrix of short- and long-run teachers eﬀects using only within school variation in teacher eﬀects. Estimates are based on the
primary model in which teacher eﬀects are constant across schools and time. See also the notes of Table A.8
.
11

===== PAGE 58 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.10: Sensitivity to runs and drift
a) Test scores, [Study skills],{Behaviors}
Standard deviations
max m
min m 1 2 3 ∞
1
0.131
[0.196]
{0.143}
0.128
[0.191]
{0.132}
0.126
[0.188]
{0.129}
0.121
[0.183]
{0.125}
2
0.120
[0.183]
{0.108}
0.117
[0.179]
{0.108}
0.112
[0.173]
{0.103}
3
0.113
[0.175]
{0.107}
0.106
[0.167]
{0.098}
b) Any CJC, [Crim arrest], {Index crime}
Standard deviations
max m
1 2 3 ∞
0.037
[0.029]
{0.020}
0.036
[0.029]
{0.019}
0.035
[0.028]
{0.019}
0.035
[0.027]
{0.018}
0.033
[0.026]
{0.017}
0.032
[0.025]
{0.015}
0.031
[0.024]
{0.015}
0.030
[0.024]
{0.013}
0.029
[0.023]
{0.013}
c) Any CJC, [Crim arrest], {Index crime}
Correlation with test score eﬀects
max m
min m 1 2 3 ∞
1
−0.019
[−0.012]
{−0.023}
−0.019
[−0.011]
{−0.027}
−0.017
[−0.007]
{−0.028}
−0.022
[−0.008]
{−0.023}
2
−0.013
[−0.024]
{−0.041}
−0.005
[−0.008]
{−0.034}
−0.019
[−0.013]
{−0.027}
3
−0.023
[−0.023]
{−0.039}
−0.035
[−0.025]
{−0.026}
d) Any CJC, [Crim arrest], {Index crime}
Correlation with behavior eﬀects
max m
1 2 3 ∞
−0.177
[−0.212]
{−0.266}
−0.190
[−0.227]
{−0.303}
−0.202
[−0.220]
{−0.284}
−0.199
[−0.202]
{−0.242}
−0.208
[−0.245]
{−0.342}
−0.246
[−0.252]
{−0.315}
−0.262
[−0.258]
{−0.288}
−0.307
[−0.305]
{−0.340}
−0.326
[−0.312]
{−0.303}
Notes: This table illustrates the sensitivity of our estimates to variations on Assumption
3 and 4. Our baseline estimates assume that E[¯uA
jt ¯uC
jt′] = 0 ∀j,t ̸= t′. Each cell in this
table shows estimates assuming it holds only for min m≤|t−t′|≤ max m. The minimum
m corresponds to the rows, while the maximum m is listed in each column. our baseline
estimates correspond to min m = 1 and max m =∞. Panel a presents estimated standard
deviations of eﬀects on test scores, study skills, and behaviors. Panel b presents analogous
estimates for any CJC, criminal arrests, and index crimes. Panels c and d present correla-
tions between eﬀects on these criminal justice outcomes and test score eﬀects (panel c) and
for behavioral eﬀects (panel d).
12

===== PAGE 59 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.11: Summary statistics of four diﬀerent sub-groups comparisons across race,
sex, socioeconomic status, and predicted risk of arrest
Full sample Race Sex Econ. disadv. Arrest risk
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
White Non-White Boys Girls Yes No High Low
Demographics
Male 0.50 0.51 0.49 1 0 0.50 0.51 0.72 0.28
Black 0.25 0 0.58 0.25 0.26 0.37 0.087 0.40 0.10
Economically disadvantaged 0.58 0.42 0.80 0.58 0.59 1 0 0.77 0.39
Limited English 0.043 0.0037 0.095 0.045 0.042 0.069 0.0075 0.017 0.070
Parents have HS education or less 0.40 0.33 0.50 0.40 0.40 0.55 0.19 0.56 0.23
Parents have some college 0.45 0.52 0.34 0.45 0.44 0.26 0.69 0.30 0.59
Parents have 4-year degree 0.22 0.28 0.14 0.22 0.22 0.064 0.43 0.096 0.35
Short-run outcomes
Standardized reading scores 0.046 0.29 -0.28 -0.018 0.11 -0.26 0.48 -0.33 0.42
Standardized math scores 0.061 0.30 -0.25 0.063 0.059 -0.25 0.50 -0.30 0.43
Days absent 9.11 9.58 8.48 9.27 8.95 10.1 7.52 10.7 7.72
Any discipline 0.17 0.12 0.23 0.22 0.11 0.22 0.081 0.28 0.076
Any out-of-school suspension 0.080 0.046 0.12 0.11 0.047 0.11 0.026 0.14 0.026
Repeat grade 0.0088 0.0062 0.012 0.011 0.0062 0.013 0.0028 0.015 0.0025
Behavioral index 4.3e-10 -0.066 0.086 0.12 -0.12 0.20 -0.32 0.35 -0.25
Time spent on homework 0.023 0.089 -0.067 -0.015 0.061 -0.086 0.16 -0.12 0.14
Time spent reading 0.0052 0.045 -0.053 -0.13 0.14 -0.049 0.079 -0.16 0.14
Time spent watching TV -0.0052 -0.16 0.20 0.061 -0.071 0.15 -0.18 0.15 -0.20
Study skills index -6.4e-10 0.11 -0.17 -0.14 0.14 -0.15 0.20 -0.23 0.30
Long-run outcomes
12th grade GPA (0-6 scale) 3.13 3.34 2.81 2.96 3.28 2.78 3.53 2.59 3.53
12th grade class rank 0.48 0.44 0.55 0.54 0.43 0.56 0.39 0.62 0.38
Graduate high school 0.91 0.92 0.90 0.90 0.93 0.87 0.97 0.86 0.96
Plans to attend 4-year college 0.46 0.46 0.45 0.41 0.50 0.35 0.60 0.32 0.56
Traﬃc infraction 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.39 0.28 0.35 0.31 0.39 0.29
Criminal arrest 0.24 0.21 0.28 0.30 0.17 0.29 0.16 0.34 0.15
Index crime arrest 0.10 0.078 0.15 0.13 0.083 0.14 0.047 0.16 0.052
Criminal conviction 0.10 0.084 0.13 0.15 0.054 0.13 0.052 0.16 0.043
Incarcerated 0.089 0.073 0.11 0.13 0.048 0.12 0.043 0.15 0.036
N student-subject-years 9779708 5536382 4243307 4892705 4887002 5673880 4035391 4889854 4889854
N teachers 39707 39366 39664 39702 39706 39683 39342 39688 39623
N students 1953547 1048427 905112 983078 970468 1085041 818161 1212875 1105939
N twin pairs 18213 10178 9494 11813 12072 12031 7921 13481 11390
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for demographic characteristics, short-run
outcomes, and long-run outcomes for the full sample (Column 1), white vs. non-white
(Columns 2 and 3), boys vs. girls (Columns 4 and 5), economic disadvantage (Columns 6
and 7), and students with high vs. low predicted risk of a future arrest (Columns 8 and 9).
Not all outcomes are observed in all years; summary statistics reﬂect means and standard
deviations for non-missing data only. In each analysis, we use the largest sample possible
for each outcome studied. See Section 1 for additional details on data construction and
outcome coverage by year.
13

===== PAGE 60 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.12: Predictors of teachers’ heterogeneous demographic eﬀects
a) Boys - Girls eﬀects
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Test scores Study skills Behaviors Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration
Female -0.0135 ∗∗∗ 0.0192∗∗∗ -0.00963∗ -0.00179 -0.00210 -0.00623 ∗∗∗
(0.00160) (0.00528) (0.00485) (0.00198) (0.00151) (0.00147)
Non-white -0.00515 ∗∗ 0.0215∗∗∗ -0.0107∗ 0.00467∗ 0.0224∗∗∗ 0.0211∗∗∗
(0.00163) (0.00543) (0.00539) (0.00210) (0.00171) (0.00160)
Constant -0.0116 ∗∗∗ -0.287∗∗∗ -0.186∗∗∗ 0.126∗∗∗ 0.0399∗∗∗ 0.0849∗∗∗
(0.00149) (0.00490) (0.00455) (0.00184) (0.00141) (0.00137)
N teachers 39670 26856 28439 27214 27214 27214
b) White - Non-white eﬀects
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Test scores Study skills Behaviors Criminal arrest Index crime Incarceration
Female 0.0105 ∗∗∗ 0.00196 -0.00729 0.000734 0.00185 -0.000448
(0.00234) (0.00742) (0.00724) (0.00296) (0.00226) (0.00213)
Non-white -0.0105 ∗∗∗ 0.0220∗∗ 0.0252∗∗ -0.00623∗ 0.000117 -0.000323
(0.00287) (0.00830) (0.00887) (0.00317) (0.00243) (0.00231)
Constant -0.00733 ∗∗∗ 0.00729 -0.110 ∗∗∗ 0.0173∗∗∗ 0.00511∗ 0.00186
(0.00218) (0.00691) (0.00681) (0.00277) (0.00212) (0.00200)
N teachers 39292 26167 27763 26477 26477 26477
Notes: This table presents demographic predictors of teachers’ relative eﬀects on boys vs.
girls (panel a) and white vs. non-white students (panel b). The outcome in each regression
is the diﬀerence in the teacher-level average of ¯Yk
jt across groups, with positive quantities
indicating larger eﬀects on boys (in panel a) or white students (in panel b). Each regression
includes all teachers where it is possible to estimate ¯Yk
jt for each sub-group and where teacher
demographics are available.
14

===== PAGE 61 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table A.13: Heterogeneity in teacher eﬀects on CJC
Race Sex Econ. disadvantaged Arrest risk
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
White Non-white Boys Girls Yes No High Low
Any CJC 0.0391 0.0370 0.0412 0.0364 0.0364 0.0367 0.0443 0.0436
(0.00195) (0.00184) (0.00259) (0.00161) (0.00131) (0.00134) (0.00225) (0.00178)
Criminal arrest 0.0247 0.0358 0.0298 0.0311 0.0272 0.0297 0.0342 0.0263
(0.00274) (0.00186) (0.00358) (0.00176) (0.00114) (0.00142) (0.00308) (0.00309)
Index crime 0.0177 0.0248 0.0147 0.0239 0.0212 0.0209 0.0276 0.0113
(0.00290) (0.00203) (0.00625) (0.00181) (0.000967) (0.00127) (0.00339) (0.00694)
Incarceration 0.0172 0.0308 0.0156 0.0270 0.0211 0.0303 0.0320 0.0201
(0.00267) (0.00142) (0.00512) (0.00136) (0.000696) (0.00102) (0.00285) (0.00380)
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses
Notes: This table presents estimates of the standard deviations of teacher eﬀects on future CJC across various sub-populations:
white vs. non-white (Columns 1 and 2), boys vs. girls (Columns 3 and 4), economically disadvantaged vs. not (Columns 5 and
6), and students with high vs. low predicted risk of a future arrest (Columns 7 and 8). Analytic standard errors displayed in
parentheses are estimated using the procedure described in Appendix C. Criminal arrest refers to any criminal interaction with
the justice system between ages 16 and 21 (i.e., excluding traﬃc tickets and non-criminal violations). Traﬃc citations includes
only non-criminal traﬃc violations. Index crimes includes arrests for Uniform Crime Reporting index crimes: aggravated assault,
forcible rape, murder, robbery, arson, burglary, larceny/theft, and motor vehicle theft. Incarceration refers to any incarceration
sentence in local jails or state prisons. Teacher eﬀect estimators include the full set of covariates described in Section 2.1 and
using all available years for each outcome.
15

===== PAGE 62 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

B What does the covariance of EB posteriors es-
timate?
This appendix investigates whether covariances of latent teacher eﬀects across out-
comes or student groups can be estimated using covariances of Empirical Bayes (EB)
estimates of individual teachers’ eﬀects. We show that covariances between EB poste-
riors can either under- or over-estimate covariances in latent eﬀects depending on the
data generating process (DGP). In cases calibrated to our data, the degree of bias can
be large and either negative or positive depending on the outcomes considered.
We begin by examining the covariance of univariate EB posteriors, which are com-
monly used in the literature (e.g., Jackson, 2018; Petek and Pope, 2021; Backes et al.,
2022; Bates et al., 2022; Biasi et al., 2021). In the univariate case, it is simple to
show analytically why the covariance of EB posteriors will diﬀer from covariances of
teacher eﬀects due to either the shrinkage factors or correlated sampling error. Next,
we examine the case of multivariate shrinkage that takes into account the covariance
in teacher eﬀects across outcomes as well as the covariance in sampling errors. We cal-
ibrate parameters to our setting and present simulations that illustrate the potential
bias and how it changes with the sample size for each teacher.
Consider ﬁrst a simple example using univariate EB posteriors. Suppose that outcome
k of student i assigned to teacher j is determined by:
Yk
ij =αk
j +ϵk
i
The distribution of teacher eﬀects αk
j is assumed to follow:
(
αA
j
αC
j
)
∼N
((
0
0
)
,
(
(σA
α )2 σAC
α
σAC
α (σC
α )2
))
The distribution of the individual heterogeneity ϵk
i is given by:
(
ϵA
i
ϵC
i
)
∼N
((
0
0
)
,
(
(σA
ϵ )2 σAC
ϵ
σAC
ϵ (σC
ϵ )2
))
For simplicity, assume that each teacher is assigned n students with outcomes gener-
16

===== PAGE 63 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

ated by this process. The average outcome of students assigned to teacher j is:
¯Yk
j =αk
j + ¯uk
j
where ¯uk
j =
∑n
i=1ϵk
i 1(j(i)=j)
n . Due to the normal-normal structure of the model, the
univariate EB posterior for teacher j’s eﬀect on outcome k, or E[αj| ¯Yj], is simply
λk
EB ¯Yk
j , where
λk
EB = (σk
α)2
(σk
α)2 +Var (¯uk
j )
It follows immediately that the covariance of simple, univariate EB posterior means
does not identify the covariance of latent teacher eﬀects, since
Cov(λA
EB ¯YA
j ,λC
EB ¯YC
j ) =λA
EBλC
EB


Cov. in teacher eﬀects
  
Cov(αA
j,αC
j ) +
Cov. in sampling error
  
Cov
(
¯uA
j, ¯uC
j
)
  
=Cov(ϵA
i ,ϵC
i )/n


The direction of bias depends on two terms: attenuation due to λA
EBλC
EB, which
falls between zero and one, and correlated sampling error Cov
(
¯uA
j, ¯uC
j
)
. When the
latter is zero, the covariance of EB posteriors is attenuated toward zero (and the
correlation is biased upwards) and could in principle be corrected by undoing multi-
plication byλA
EBλC
EB, although this is rarely done. Since in general Cov
(
¯uA
j, ¯uC
j
)
(i.e.,
Cov
(
ϵA
i ,ϵC
i
)
) can take any sign, the overall bias is unclear in general settings.
In practice, researchers may use multivariate EB estimators that take account of data
for both outcomes simultaneously. These estimators also fail to recover unbiased
estimates of covariances in latent eﬀects. To show how, we construct an illustration
based on the variance-covariance of teacher eﬀects and classroom-level sampling error
in our data. Table B.1 reports estimates of both, with the latter in brackets. The
variances of the classroom-level sampling error are large. Indeed, in some cases they
are bigger than that of teacher eﬀects. Additionally, there is meaningful correlations
in classroom-level sampling error of diﬀerent signs across outcomes.
We use the estimated variance-covariance of teacher eﬀects and classroom-level sam-
pling error to construct the implied covariance (and correlation) in EB posteriors from
the normal-normal model described above for diﬀerent values ofn and examine how it
17

===== PAGE 64 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Table B.1: Variance-covariance of latent teacher eﬀects and student-level heterogene-
ity
Test scores Behaviors Criminal arrest
Test scores 0.121 [0.1391] 0.056 [0.0614] -0.008 [-0.0404]
Behaviors 0.125 [0.2144] -0.202 [-0.1048]
Criminal arrest 0.027 [0.0697]
Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations (diagonal elements) and correla-
tions (oﬀ-diagonal elements) of teacher eﬀects and classroom-level sampling error (i.e., ¯uk
j )
for key outcomes. The former is reported without brackets, while the latter is reported in
square brackets.
relates to the true covariances (and correlations) of latent eﬀects. The EB estimates
use a multivariate model that constructs posterior means as:
E[(αA
j,αB
j )|( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )] = Σ12Σ−1
22 ( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j ) (B.1)
where Σ12 =
(
σA
α σAC
α
σAC
α σC
α
)
and Σ22 =
(
Var ( ¯YA
j ) Cov( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )
Cov( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j ) Var ( ¯YB
j )
)
.
Figure B.1 reports the results. Each point in the ﬁgure shows the ratio between the co-
variance (or correlation) of EB posterior means, orCov
(
E[αA
j|( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )],E [αB
j|( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )]
)
and the covariance (or correlation) of latent eﬀects, or Cov(αA
j,αB
j ), indicating the
proportional degree of bias. The x-axis report the number of students assigned to
each teacher (n).
In Panel A, we impose that there is no correlated classroom-level sampling error across
outcomes, so that Cov
(
¯uk
j, ¯uk′
j
)
(i.e.,Cov(ϵk
i,ϵk′
i ) = 0) for any two outcomes k andk′.
As we would expect, the bias is decreasing with the number of students per teacher
as the shrinkage factors converge to one and teacher-speciﬁc means converge to αk
j .
This pattern holds for the covariance estimates across all pairs of outcomes. However,
even with 200 students per teacher, the magnitude of the bias is non-negligible.
In Panel B, we re-introduce the correlations in classroom-level sampling error reported
in Table B.1. The results are consistent across the outcomes considered. The biases
from correlation in classroom-level sampling error across outcomes and the shrinkage
factors are large and persistent. Importantly, for the covariance of test scores and
criminal arrest eﬀects the bias is large even with 1,000 students per teacher, implying
18

===== PAGE 65 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

very accurate estimates of each teacher’s eﬀects.
Panels C and D report the bias of estimates of correlations rather than covariances
and are analogous to Panels A and B. The results are broadly similar and show
persistent and meaningful bias even with a large number of students per teacher. For
the correlation between eﬀects on behaviors and test scores, the biases from correlated
classroom-level sampling error across outcomes and the shrinkage factors happen to
cancel each other out. The former biases the estimate up, while the latter pulls the
estimate towards zero. However, for the other correlations the biases do not cancel
out. Importantly, for the correlation in test scores and criminal arrest the bias is
meaningful even with 1,000 students per teacher, implying very accurate estimates of
each teacher’s eﬀects.
19

===== PAGE 66 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

Figure B.1: Bias of the covariance of EB posterior means as an estimator of the
covariance of latent teacher eﬀects
Bias in covariances
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Number of students in classroom
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
estimate/true Cov. 
 in latent teacher effects
Cov(Crime effects, T est scores effects)
Cov(T est scores effects, Behavior effects)
Cov(Crime effects, Behavior effects)
Estimated Cov. equals true one
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Number of students in classroom
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
estimate/true Cov. 
 in latent teacher effects
Cov(Crime effects, T est scores effects)
Cov(T est scores effects, Behavior effects)
Cov(Crime effects, Behavior effects)
Estimated Cov. equals true one
A. Imposing zero covariance B. No restrictions
between sampling errors across outcomes
Bias in correlations
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Number of students in classroom
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
estimate/true Corr. 
 in latent teacher effects
Corr(Crime effects, T est scores effects)
Corr(T est scores effects, Behavior effects)
Corr(Crime effects, Behavior effects)
Estimated Corr. equals true one
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Number of students in classroom
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
estimate/true Corr. 
 in latent teacher effects
Corr(Crime effects, T est scores effects)
Corr(T est scores effects, Behavior effects)
Corr(Crime effects, Behavior effects)
Estimated Corr. equals true one
C. Imposing zero covariance D. No restrictions
between sampling errors across outcomes
Notes: This ﬁgure shows results of calculations from the data generating process described
in Appendix B. The x-axis is the number of students assigned to each teacher. The y-
axis compares the covariance (or correlation) in latent teacher eﬀects across outcomes A
and B (e.g., test scores and criminal arrest between ages 16 to 21) to the covariance (or
correlation) in EB posterior means. Each dot plots the ratio of covariances (or correlations),
Cov(αA
j,αB
j ) to Cov
(
E[αA
j|( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )],E [αB
j|( ¯YA
j , ¯YB
j )]
)
. Panel A imposes that there is no
correlation in classroom-level sampling error, while Panel B uses estimates from our data
reported in Table B.1. Panels C and D are analogous to Panels A and B but report results
for correlations rather than covariances. 20

===== PAGE 67 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

C Inference on variance components
Our standard errors rely on second-order U-statistic representations of the estimators
in Equations 4 and 7. Speciﬁcally, the estimator for the covariance in latent eﬀects
between two outcomes (e.g., A and C) or the variance of latent eﬀects (e.g., when
A =C) can be written as:
ˆCov(aA
j,aC
j ) =
∑
i
∑
k̸=i
CAC
ik YA
i YC
k
CAC
ik =



J−1
J 2
1
|T A
j(i)||T C
j(k)|−|T A
j(i)∩T C
j(k)| if j(i) =j(k)
−1
|T A
j(i)||T C
j(k)|J 2 if j(i)̸=j(k)
where, with a slight abuse of notation, i andk index teacher-year mean residuals, i.e.,
Yk
i = ¯Yk
j(i)t(i), if outcome k is observed for teacher j in year t and zero otherwise, J
is the total number of teachers, and Tk
j is the set of time periods where outcome k is
observed for teacher j.
The sampling covariance between any two covariance (or variance) estimates of eﬀects
on outcomes A and B and C and D can be expressed as:
Cov
(
ˆCov(aA
j,aB
j )−Cov(aA
j,aB
j ), ˆCov(aC
j,aD
j )−Cov(aC
j,aD
j
)
=Cov
(∑
i
vA
i
∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik aB
j(k) +
∑
i
vB
i
∑
k̸=i
CBA
ik aA
j(k) +
∑
i
vA
i
∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik vB
k,
∑
i
vC
i
∑
k̸=i
CCD
ik aD
j(k) +
∑
i
vD
i
∑
k̸=i
CDC
ik aC
j(k) +
∑
i
vC
i
∑
k̸=i
CCD
ik vD
k
)
=
∑
i
σAC
i
(∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik aB
j(k)
)(∑
k̸=i
CCD
ik aD
j(k)
)
+
∑
i
σAD
i
(∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik aB
j(k)
)(∑
k̸=i
CDC
ik aC
j(k)
)
+
∑
i
σBC
i
(∑
k̸=i
CBA
ik aA
j(k)
)(∑
k̸=i
CCD
ik aD
j(k)
)
+
∑
i
σBD
i
(∑
k̸=i
CBA
ik aA
j(k)
)(∑
k̸=i
CDC
ik aC
j(k)
)
+
∑
i
σAD
i
∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik CDC
ik σBC
k +
∑
i
σAC
i
∑
k̸=i
CAB
ik CCD
ik σBD
k
where as in the main text we deﬁne ¯Yk
j(i)t(i) = ak
j(i) + ˆ¯uk
j(i)t(i) and deﬁne σAB
i as the
covariance between ˆ¯uA
j(i)t(i) and ˆ¯uB
j(i)t(i).
Special cases of this expression deliver sampling variances for objects such asVar (ˆaA
j ),
21

===== PAGE 68 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

which can be written as:
Var ( ˆVar (aA
j )−Var (aA
j )) = 4
∑
i
(σA
i )2
(∑
k̸=i
CAA
ik aA
j(k)
)2
+ 2
∑
i
∑
k̸=i
(CAA
ik )2(σA
i )2(σA
k )2
where (σA
i )2 =σAA
i .
C.1 Plug-in estimator of standard errors
As noted in Kline et al. (2020), plug-in estimators of these variances using and ˆak
j and
ˆσkl
j will generically be biased since, for example, ( ˆλml
i )2 =
(∑
k̸=iCml
ik ¯Yl
k
)2
is not an
unbiased estimate of (λml
i )2 =
(∑
k̸=iCml
ik al
j(k)
)2
. It is straightforward to construct a
correction for these terms, however, since for exampleE[(ˆλml
i )2]−Var (ˆλml
i ) =E[ˆλml
i ]2,
and:
Var (ˆλml
i ) =
∑
k̸=i
(Cml
ik )2σll
k
We can express the bias correction for the product of λml
i and λgh
i analogously. We
use these corrections to construct unbiased estimates of ( λml
i )2 and λml
i λgh
i . We use
the same unbiased estimates of (σk
i )2 and σkl
i as in the main text to form our plug-in
estimators of sampling variances and covariances. The remaining bias in the resulting
plug-in estimate of sampling variances stems from terms such as (ˆσk
i )4. Though it is
possible to construct unbiased estimates of these objects using split sample techniques,
we do not do so. As discussed in Kline et al. (2020), using the biased plug-in versions of
these terms results in conservative inference but avoids the need to subset to teachers
with suﬃcient observations to construct split sample estimates of these terms.
C.2 Standard errors for functions of variance-covariance es-
timates
Wherever possible, we use the delta method to construct standard errors for functions
of multiple variance-covariance components, such as a correlation coeﬃcient. In some
cases, however, we use a parametric bootstrap assuming that variance-covariance es-
timates are normally distributed around the point estimates, with sampling variance-
covariance structure given by estimated sampling variance-covariances. Doing so pro-
vides a convenient way to generate standard errors for more complicated objects, such
as multivariate regression coeﬃcients.
22

===== PAGE 69 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

D Policy simulation details
This appendix includes technical details for the implementation of the simulations
discussed in Section 5. These simulations examine the implications for a given long-
run outcome of replacing the bottom 5% of teachers, according to a given measure
of quality, with an average teacher for exposed students. In Section 5, we discuss
ranking teachers based on three diﬀerent options: (i) an index based on teachers’
true direct eﬀect on long-run outcomes, (ii) an index using teachers’ true eﬀects on
short-run outcomes, and (iii) an index using Empirical Bayes estimates of teacher
eﬀects on short-run outcomes. In all cases, we assume that all short- and long-run
teacher eﬀects are jointly normally distributed, allowing us to characterize the full
distribution of teacher quality using our variance estimates.
D.1 Index using true teacher eﬀects on long-run outcomes
In this case, the calculations are straightforward. We are interested in the impact
of replacing the bottom 5% of teachers according to the quality index in Equation
12 with the average teacher. Thus, when estimating the eﬀect of such a policy on
teachers’ eﬀect on college attendance, for example, the estimand of interest is:
E[µA]−E[µA|ωµC + (1−ω)µA <q Ideal long-run
0.05 ]
where qIdeal long-run
0.05 is the ﬁfth percentile of the distribution of µC + (1−ω)µA. The
calculation is straightforward given the properties of a bivariate normal distribution
and the variance-covariance matrix of (µA,ωµC + (1−ω)µA).
D.2 Index using true teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes
In this case, the calculations are also straightforward. We are interested in the impact
of replacing the bottom 5% of teachers according to the quality index in Equation 13
with average teachers. Thus, when estimating the eﬀect of such a policy on teachers’
eﬀect on college attendance, for example, the estimand of interest is:
E[µA]−E[µA|ω1µT +ω2µB + (1−ω1−ω2)µS <q Ideal short-run
0.05 ]
where qIdeal short-run
0.05 is the ﬁfth percentile of the distribution of ω1µT +ω2µB + (1−
ω1−ω2)µS. The calculation is straightforward given the properties of a bivariate
normal distribution and the variance-covariance matrix of ( µA,ω 1µT +ω2µB + (1−
ω1−ω2)µS).
23

===== PAGE 70 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

D.3 Index using Empirical Bayes estimates of eﬀects on short-
run outcomes
In this case, the calculations require a few steps. Recall that we are interested in the
impact of replacing the bottom 5% of teachers with average teachers according to an
Empirical Bayes estimate of the quality index in Equation 13.
The policy maker observes the performance of the students of teacherj along multiple
dimensions: (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS). Thus, the ﬁrst step is forming an Empirical Bayes estimate
of the teacher quality index. We assume that all random variables are normally
distributed and that teacher eﬀect estimates are the sum of true teacher eﬀects and
independent, identically distributed noise. The Empirical Bayes estimate is:
IndexEB short-run
j =E[ω1µT +ω2µB + (1−ω1−ω2)µS
  
=IndexIdeal short-run
j
|ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS] (D.1)
=E[IndexIdeal short-run
j ] +b′
I
[
(ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS)−E[(ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS)]
]
(D.2)
wherebI is the linear projection of IndexEB short-run
j on (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS), i.e., Σ−1
ˆµˆµΣˆµIndexEB short-run
j
with ˆµ = (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS). The last equality follows from the properties of the multivari-
ate normal distribution. Note, that as Index EB short-run
j is a linear combination of
normally distributed variables, then it is also normally distributed.
The second step is to predict the eﬀect of conducting a policy that replaces all teachers
with IndexEB short-run
j that is below the 0.05 percentile with the average teacher. Since
IndexEB short-run
j is normally distributed, calculating its ﬁfth percentile is straightfor-
ward.
To formulate our best predictor of the impact of the policy on an outcome of interest
Y , we use also teachers’ observed performance. We construct our estimator in two
steps. First, we calculate the Empirical Bayes estimate of Y given (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS):
ˆY EB short-run =E[Y|ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS] (D.3)
=E[Y ] +b′
Y
[
(ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS)−E[(ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS)]
]
(D.4)
wherebY is the linear projection ofY onto (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS). The second step is to calculate
24

===== PAGE 71 / 71: rss_teachers_cjc.pdf =====

the predicted change in Y due to the replacement policy:
E[ ˆY EB short-run]  
=E[Y ]
−E[ ˆY EB short-run|IndexEB short-run
j <q EB of short-run
0.05 ] (D.5)
= Cov( ˆY EB short-run, IndexEB short-run
j )
Var
(
IndexEB short-run
j
) E[IndexEB short-run
j |IndexEB short-run
j <q EB of short-run
0.05 ]
= Cov( ˆY EB short-run, IndexEB short-run
j )
Var
(
IndexEB short-run
j
) σIndexEB short-run
j
φ
(
qEB of short-run
0.05 −E[IndexEB short-run
j ]
σIndexEB short-run
j
)
Φ
(
qEB of short-run
0.05 −E[IndexEB short-run
j ]
σIndexEB short-run
j
)
and note that:
Cov( ˆY EB short-run, IndexEB short-run
j ) =Cov(b′
I ˆµ,b′
Y ˆµ)
Implementing this homoscedastic EB-version of retention policies requires only esti-
mating the variance-covariance of (ˆµT, ˆµB, ˆµS), which can be directly estimated given
individual teacher eﬀect estimates, and the previously estimated variance-covariances
of teacher eﬀects on short-run outcomes.
25